BOOK IV 434c-436c 111
will never get a precise answer using our present methods of argument— 
although there is another longer and fuller road that does lead to such an d 
answer. But perhaps we can get an answer that’s up to the standard of our 
previous statements and inquiries.
Isn’t that satisfactory? It would be enough for me at present.
In that case, it will be fully enough for me too.
Then don’t weary, but go on with the inquiry.
Well, then, we are surely compelled to agree that each of us has within 
himself the same parts and characteristics as the city? Where else would e 
they come from? It would be ridiculous for anyone to think that spiritedness 
didn’t come to be in cities from such individuals as the Thracians, Scythi-
ans, and others who live to the north of us who are held to possess spirit, 
or that the same isn’t true of the love of learning, which is mosdy associated 
with our part of the world, or of the love of money, which one might say 436 
is conspicuously displayed by the Phoenicians and Egyptians.
It would.
That’s the way it is, anyway, and it isn’t hard to understand.
Certainly not.
But this is hard. Do we do these things with the same part of ourselves, 
or do we do them with three different parts? Do we learn with one part, 
get angry with another, and with some third part desire the pleasures of 
food, drink, sex, and the others that are closely akin to them? Or, when 
we set out after something, do we act with the whole of our soul, in each 
case? This is what’s hard to determine in a way that’s up to the standards b 
of our argument.
I think so too.
Well, then, let’s try to determine in that way whether these parts are 
the same or different.
How?
It is obvious that the same thing will not be willing to do or undergo 
opposites in the same part of itself, in relation to the same thing, at the 
same time. So, if we ever find this happening in the soul, we’ll know that 
we aren’t dealing with one thing but many. c
All right.
Then consider what I’m about to say.
Say on.
Is it possible for the same thing to stand still and move at the same time 
in the same part of itself?
Not at all.
Let’s make our agreement more precise in order to avoid disputes later 
on. If someone said that a person who is standing still but moving his 
hands and head is moving and standing still at the same time, we wouldn’t


112 Socrat es /Glau c o n
consider, 1 think, that he ought to put it like that. What he ought to say 
is that one part of the person is standing still and another part is moving. 
d Isn’t that so?
It is.
And if our interlocutor became even more amusing and was sophisti-
cated enough to say that whole spinning tops stand still and move at the 
same time when the peg is fixed in the same place and they revolve, and 
that the same is true of anything else moving in a circular motion on the 
same spot, we wouldn’t agree, because it isn’t with respect to the same 
parts of themselves that such things both stand still and move. We’d say 
e that they have an axis and a circumference and that with respect to the 
axis they stand still, since they don’t wobble to either side, while with 
respect to the circumference they move in a circle. But if they do wobble 
to the left or right, front or back, while they are spinning, we’d say that 
they aren’t standing stiU in any way.
And we’d be right.
No such statement will disturb us, then, or make us believe that the 
same thing can be, do, or undergo opposites, at the same time, in the same 
437 respect, and in relation to the same thing.
They won’t make me believe it, at least.
Nevertheless, in order to avoid going through all these objections one 
by one and taking a long time to prove them all untrue, let’s assume that 
our hypothesis is correct and carry on. But we agree that if it should ever 
be shown to be incorrect, all the consequences we’ve drawn from it will 
also be invalidated.
We should agree to that.
b Then wouldn’t you consider all the following, whether they are doings 
or undergoings, as pairs of opposites: Assent and dissent, wanting to have 
something and rejecting it, taking something and pushing it away?
Yes, they are opposites.
What about these? Wouldn’t you include thirst, hunger, the appetites 
c as a whole, and wishing and willing somewhere in the class we mentioned? 
Wouldn’t you say that the soul of someone who has an appetite for a thing 
wants what he has an appetite for and takes to himself what it is his will 
to have, and that insofar as he wishes something to be given to him, his 
soul, since it desires this to come about, nods assent to it as if in answer 
to a question?
I would.
What about not willing, not wishing, and not having an appetite? Aren’t 
these among the very opposites— cases in which the soul pushes and drives 
things away? 
d Of course.


BOOK IV 436c-438b 113
Then won’t we say that there is a class of things called appetites and 
that the clearest examples are hunger and thirst?
We will.
One of these is for food and the other for drink?
Yes.
Now, insofar as it is thirst, is it an appetite in the soul for more than 
that for which we say that it is the appetite? For example, is thirst thirst 
for hot drink or cold, or much drink or litde, or, in a word, for drink of 
a certain sort? Or isn’t it rather that, where heat is present as well as thirst, 
it causes the appetite to be for something cold as well, and where cold for e 
something hot, and where there is much thirst because of the presence of 
muchness, it will cause the desire to be for much, and where little for 
little? But thirst itself will never be for anything other than what it is in its 
nature to be for, namely, drink itself, and hunger for food.
That’s the way it is, each appetite itself is only for its natural object, 
while the appetite for something of a certain sort depends on additions.
Therefore, let no one catch us unprepared or disturb us by claiming 438 
that no one has an appetite for drink but rather good drink, nor food but 
good food, on the grounds that everyone after all has appetite for good 
things, so that if thirst is an appetite, it will be an appetite for good drink 
or whatever, and similarly with the others.’
All the same, the person who says that has a point.
But it seems to me that, in the case of all things that are related to 
something, those that are of a particular sort are related to a particular 
sort of thing, while those that are merely themselves are related to a thing b 
that is merely itself.
I don’t imderstand.
Don’t you understand that the greater is such as to be greater than 
something?
Of course.
Than the less?
Yes.
And the much greater than the much less, isn’t that so?
Yes.
And the once greater to the once less? And the going-to-be greater than 
the going-to-be less?
Certainly.
And isn’t the same true of the more and the fewer, the double and the
9. Plato is here laying the foundations for his rejection of the principle, espoused by 
Socrates in many earlier dialogues, that weakness of will is impossible. See Introduction 
p. X.


114 Socr at es /Glau c o n
c half, heavier and lighter, faster and slower, the hot and the cold, and all 
other such things?
Of course.
And what about the various kinds of knowledge? Doesn’t the same 
apply? Knowledge itself is knowledge of what can be learned itself (or 
whatever it is that knowledge is of), while a particular sort of knowledge 
is of a particular sort of thing. For example, when knowledge of building 
d houses came to be, didn’t it differ from the other kinds of knowledge, and 
so was called knowledge of building?
Of course.
And wasn’t that because it was a different sort of knowledge from all 
the others?
Yes.
And wasn’t it because it was of a particular sort of thing that it itself 
became a particular sort of knowledge? And isn’t this true of all crafts and 
kinds of knowledge?
It is.
Well, then, this is what I was trying to say— if you imderstand it now— 
when I said that of all things that are related to something, those that are 
merely themselves are related to things that are merely themselves, while 
those that are of a particular sort are related to things of a particular sort. 
e However, I don’t mean that the sorts in question have to be the same for 
them both. For example, knowledge of health or disease isn’t healthy or 
diseased, and knowledge of good and bad doesn’t itself become good or 
bad. I mean that, when knowledge became, not knowledge of the thing 
itself that knowledge is of, but knowledge of something of a particular 
sort, the result was that it itself became a particular sort of knowledge, 
and this caused it to be no longer called knowledge without qualification, 
but— ^with the addition of the relevant sort—medical  knowledge or 
whatever.
I understand, and I think that that’s the way it is.
Then as for thirst, wouldn’t you include it among things that are related 
439 to something? Surely thirst is related to ...
I know it’s related to drink.
Therefore a particular sort of thirst is for a particular sort of drink. But 
thirst itself isn’t for much or little, good or bad, or, in a word, for drink 
of a particular sort. Rather, thirst itself is in its nature only for drink itself.
Absolutely.
Hence the soul of the thirsty person, insofar as he’s thirsty, doesn’t wish 
b anything else but to drink, and it wants this and is impelled towards it.
Clearly.
Therefore, if something draws it back when it is thirsting, wouldn’t that


BOOK IV 438c-440a 115
be something difTerent in it from whatever thirsts and drives it like a beast 
to drink? It can’t be, we say, that the same thing, with the same part of 
itself, in relation to the same, at the same time, does opposite things.
No, it can’t.
In the same way, I suppose, it’s wrong to say of the archer that his hands 
at the same time push the bow away and draw it towards him. We ought 
to say that one hand pushes it away and the other draws it towards him.
Absolutely. ‘
Now, would we assert that sometimes there are thirsty people who don’t 
wish to drink?
Certainly, it happens often to many different people.
What, then, should one say about them? Isn’t it that there is something 
in their soul, bidding them to drink, and something different, forbidding 
them to do so, that overrules the thing that bids?
I think so.
Doesn’t that which forbids in such cases come into play— if it comes 
into play at all— as a result of rational calculation, while what drives and 
drags them to drink is a result of feelings and diseases? d
Apparently.
Hence it isn’t imreasonable for us to claim that they are two, and 
different from one another. We’ll call the part of the soul with which it 
calculates the rational part and the part with which it lusts, hungers, thirsts, 
and gets excited by other appetites the irrational appetitive part, companion 
of certain indulgences and pleasures.
Yes. Indeed, that’s a reasonable thing to think. e
Then, let these two parts be distinguished in the soul. Now, is the 
spirited part by which we get angry a third part or is it of the same nature 
as either of the other two?
Perhaps it’s like the appetitive part.
But I’ve heard something relevant to this, and I believe it. Leontius, the 
son of Aglaion, was going up from the Piraeus along the outside of the 
North Wall when he saw some corpses lying at the executioner’s feet. He 
had an appetite to look at them but at the same time he was disgusted and 
turned away. For a time he struggled with himself and covered his face, 
but, finally, overpowered by the appetite, he pushed his eyes wide open 440 
and rushed towards the corpses, saying, “Look for yourselves, you evil 
wretches, take your fill of the beautiful sight!”'®
I’ve heard that story myself.
10. Leontius’ desire to look at the corpses is sexual in nature, for a fragment of 
contemporary comedy tells us that Leontius was known for his love of boys as pale as 
corpses.


116 Socrates /Glau con
It certainly proves that anger sometimes makes war against the appetites, 
as one thing against another.
Besides, don’t we often notice in other cases that when appetite forces 
someone contrary to rational calculation, he reproaches himself and gets 
b angry with that in him that’s doing the forcing, so that of the two factions 
that are fighting a civil war, so to speak, spirit allies itself with reason.^ But 
I don’t think you can say that you’ve ever seen spirit, either in yourself or 
anyone else, ally itself with an appetite to do what reason has decided must 
not be done.
No, by god, I haven’t.
What happens when a person thinks that he has done something unjust? 
c Isn’t it true that the nobler he is, the less he resents it if he suffers hunger, 
cold, or the like at the hands of someone whom he believes to be inflicting 
this on him justly, and won’t his spirit, as I say, refuse to be aroused?
That’s true.
But what happens if, instead, he believes that someone has been unjust 
to him? Isn’t the spirit within him boiling and angry, fighting for what he 
believes to be just? Won’t it endure hunger, cold, and the like and keep 
d on till it is victorious, not ceasing from noble actions until it either wins, 
dies, or calms down, called to heel by the reason within him, like a dog 
by a shepherd?
Spirit is certainly like that. And, of course, we made the auxiliaries in 
our city like dogs obedient to the rulers, who are themselves like shepherds 
of a city.
You well understand what I’m trying to say. But also reflect on this 
further point. 
e What?
The position of the spirited part seems to be the opposite of what we 
thought before. Then we thought of it as something appetitive, but now 
we say that it is far from being that, for in the civil war in the soul it aligns 
itself far more with the rational part.
Absolutely.
Then is it also different from the rational part, or is it some form of it, 
so that there are two parts in the soul— the rational and the appetitive—  
instead of three? Or rather, just as there were three classes in the city that 
441 held it together, the money-making, the auxiliary, and the deliberative, is 
the spirited part a third thing in the soul that is by nature the helper 
of the rational part, provided that it hasn’t been corrupted by a bad 
upbringing?
It must be a third.
Yes, provided that we can show it is different from the rational part, as 
we saw earlier it was from the appetitive one.


BOOK IV 440a-441e 117
It isn’t difficult to show that it is different. Even in small children, one 
can see that they are full of spirit right from birth, while as far as rational 
calculation is concerned, some never seem to get a share of it, while the 
majority do so quite late. h
That’s really well put. And in animals too one can see that what you say 
is true. Besides, our earlier quotation from Homer bears it out, where he 
says.
He struck his chest and spoke to his heart?^
For here Homer clearly represents the part that has calculated about better 
and worse as different from the part ffiat is angry without calculation. c
That’s exactly right.
Well, then, we’ve now made our difficult way through a sea of argument.
We are pretty much agreed that the same number and the same kinds of 
classes as are in the city are also in the soul of each individual.
That’s true.
Therefore, it necessarily follows that the individual is wise in the same 
way and in the same part of himself as the city.
That’s right.
And isn’t the individual courageous in the same way and in the same 
part of himself as the city? And isn’t everything else that has to do with d 
virtue the same in both?
Necessarily.
Moreover, Glaucon, I suppose we’ll say that a man is just in the same 
way as a city.
That too is entirely necessary.
And we surely haven’t forgotten that the city was just because each of 
the three classes in it was doing its own work.
I don’t think we could forget that.
Then we must also remember that each one of us in whom each part 
is doing its own work will himself be just and do his own. e
Of course, we must.
Therefore, isn’t it appropriate for the rational part to rule, since it is 
really wise and exercises foresight on behalf of the whole soul, and for the 
spirited part to obey it and be its ally?
It certainly is.
And isn’t it, as we were saying, a mixture of music and poetry, on the 
one hand, and physical training, on the other, that makes the two parts 
harmonious, stretching and nurturing the rational part with fine words
11. See390d.


118 Socrat es /Glau c o n
and learning, relaxing the other part through soothing stories, and making 
442 it gende by means of harmony and rhythm?
That’s precisely it.
And these two, having been nurtured in this way, and having truly 
learned their own roles and been educated in them, will govern the 
appetitive part, which is the largest part in each person’s soul and is by 
nature most insatiable for money. They’ll watch over it to see that it isn’t 
filled with the so-called pleasures of the body and that it doesn’t become 
so big and strong that it no longer does its own work but attempts to 
b enslave and rule over the classes it isn’t fitted to rule, thereby overturning 
everyone’s whole life.
That’s right.
Then, wouldn’t these two parts also do the finest job of guarding the 
whole soul and body against external enemies— reason by planning, spirit 
by fighting, following its leader, and carrying out the leader’s decisions 
through its courage?
Yes, that’s true.
And it is because of the spirited part, I suppose, that we call a single 
c individual courageous, namely, when it preserves through pains and plea-
sures the declarations of reason about what is to be feared and what isn’t.
That’s right.
And we’ll call him wise because of that small part of himself that rules 
in him and makes those declarations and has within it the knowledge of 
what is advantageous for each part and for the whole soul, which is the 
community of all three parts.
Absolutely.
And isn’t he moderate because of the friendly and harmonious relations 
between these same parts, namely, when the ruler and the ruled believe 
in common that the rational part should rule and don’t engage in civil war 
d against it?
Moderation is surely nothing other than that, both in the city and in the 
individual.
And, of course, a person will be just because of what we’ve so often 
mentioned, and in that way.
Necessarily.
Well, then, is the justice in us at all indistinct? Does it seem to be 
something different from what we found in the city?
It doesn’t seem so to me.
If there are still any doubts in our soul about this, we could dispel them 
e altogether by appealing to ordinary cases.
Which ones?
For example, if we had to come to an agreement about whether someone


BOOK IV 441e-443e 119
similar in nature and training to our city had embezzled a deposit of gold 
or silver that he had accepted, who do you think would consider him to 
have done it rather than someone who isn’t like him?
No one.
And would he have anything to do with temple robberies, thefts, betray-
als of friends in private life or of cities in public life?
No, nothing.
And he’d be in no way untrustworthy in keeping an oath or other 
agreement.
How could he be?
And adultery, disrespect for parents, and neglect of the gods would be 
more in keeping with every other kind of character than his.
With every one.
And isn’t the cause of all this that every part within him does its own 
work, whether it’s ruling or being ruled?
Yes, that and nothing else.
Then, are you still looking for justice to be something other than this 
power, the one that produces men and cities of the sort we’ve described?
No, I certainly am not.
Then the dream we had has been completely fulfilled—our  suspicion 
that, with the help of some god, we had hit upon the origin and pattern 
of justice right at the beginning in founding our city.'^
Absolutely.
Indeed, Glaucon, the principle that it is right for someone who is by 
nature a cobbler to practice cobblery and nothing else, for the carpenter 
to practice carpentry, and the same for the others is a sort of image of 
justice—that ’s why it’s beneficial.
Apparently.
And in truth justice is, it seems, something of this sort. However, it isn’t 
concerned with someone’s doing his own externally, but with what is inside 
him, with what is truly himself and his own. One who is just does not 
allow any part of himself to do the work of another part or allow the various 
classes within him to meddle with each other. He regulates well what is 
really his own and rules himself. He puts himself in order, is his own 
friend, and harmonizes the three parts of himself like three limiting notes 
in a musical scale— high, low, and middle. He binds together those parts 
and any others there may be in between, and from having been many 
things he becomes entirely one, moderate and harmonious. Only then 
does he act. And when he does anything, whether acquiring wealth, taking 
care of his body, engaging in politics, or in private contracts—in  all of
12. See 432c-433b.


Socr at es /Glau c o n
these, he believes that the action is just and fine that preserves this inner 
harmony and helps achieve it, and calls it so, and regards as wisdom the 
knowledge that oversees such actions. And he believes that the action that 
444 destroys this harmony is unjust, and calls it so, and regards the belief that 
oversees it as ignorance.
That’s absolutely true, Socrates.
Well, then, if we claim to have found the just man, the just city, and 
what the justice is that is in them, I don’t suppose that we’ll seem to be 
telling a complete falsehood.
No, we certainly won’t.
Shall we claim it, then.?
We shall.
So be it. Now, I suppose we must look for injustice.
Clearly.
b Surely,  it must be a kind of civil war between the three parts, a meddling
and doing of another’s work, a rebellion by some part against the whole 
soul in order to rule it inappropriately. The rebellious part is by nature 
suited to be a slave, while the other part is not a slave but belongs to the 
ruling class. We’ll say something like that, I suppose, and that the turmoil 
and straying of these parts are injustice, licentiousness, cowardice, igno-
rance, and, in a word, the whole of vice.
That’s what they are.
So, if justice and injustice are really clear enough to us, then acting 
c justly, acting unjusdy, and doing injustice are also clear.
How so.?
Because just and unjust actions are no different for the soul than healthy 
and unhealthy things are for the body.
In what way.?
Healthy things produce health, unhealthy ones disease.
Yes.
And don’t just actions produce justice in the soul and unjust ones 
d injustice.?
Necessarily.
To produce health is to establish the components of the body in a 
natural relation of control and being controlled, one by another, while to 
produce disease is to establish a relation of ruling and being ruled contrary 
to nature.
That’s right.
Then, isn’t to produce justice to establish the parts of the soul in a 
natural relation of control, one by another, while to produce injustice is 
to establish a relation of ruling and being ruled contrary to nature.?
Precisely.


BOOK IV 443e-445e 121
Virtue seems, then, to be a kind of health, fine condition, and well-
being of the soul, while vice is disease, shameful condition, and weakness.
That’s true.
And don’t fine ways of living lead one to the possession of virtue, 
shameful ones to vice?
Necessarily.
So it now remains, it seems, to enquire whether it is more profitable to 
act justly, live in a fine way, and be just, whether one is known to be so 
or not, or to act unjustly and be unjust, provided that one doesn’t pay the 
penalty and become better as a result of punishment.
But, Socrates, this inquiry looks ridiculous to me now that justice and 
injustice have been shown to be as we have described. Even if one has 
every kind of food and drink, lots of money, and every sort of power to 
rule, life is thought to be not worth living when the body’s nature is ruined. 
So even if someone can do whatever he wishes, except what will free him 
from vice and injustice and make him acquire justice and virtue, how can 
it be worth living when his soul—the  veiy thing by which he lives— is 
ruined and in turmoil?
Yes, it is ridiculous. Nevertheless, now that we’ve come far enough to 
be able to see most clearly that this is so, we mustn’t give up.
That’s absolutely the last thing we must do.
Then come here, so that you can see how many forms of vice there are, 
anyhow that I consider worthy of examination.
I’m following you, just tell me.
Well, from the vantage point we’ve reached in our argument, it seems 
to me that there is one form of virtue and an unlimited number of forms 
of vice, four of which are worth mentioning.
How do you mean?
It seems likely that there are as many types of soul as there are specific 
types of political constitution.
How many is that?
Five forms of constitution and five of souls.
What are they?
One is the constitution we’ve been describing. And it has two names. 
If one outstanding man emerges among the rulers, it’s called a kingship; 
if more than one, it’s called an aristocracy.
That’s true.
Therefore, I say that this is one form of constitution. Whether one man 
emerges or many, none of the significant laws of the city would be changed, 
if they followed the upbringing and education we described.
Probably not.
