Mi
CHAPTERt\V5' ''
Equalizing Assessments ofThings^
Ziqi of the Southern Wall was reclining against a low table on the ground, re­
leasing his breath into Heaven above, all in a scatter, as if loosed from a partner.
Yancheng Ziyou stood in attendance before him. “What has happened 
here?” he said. “Can the body really be made like dried wood, the mind like 
dead ashes? What reclines against this table now is not what reclined against 
it before.”
Ziqi said, “A good question, Yan! What has happened here is simply that I 
have lost me. Do you understand? You hear the piping of man but not yet the 
piping of the earth. You hear the piping of the earth but not yet the piping of 
Heaven.”
Ziyou said, “Please tell me more.”
Ziqi replied, “When the Great Clump belches forth its vital breath,^ we call 
it the wind As soon as it arises, raging cries emerge from all the ten thousand 
hollows. Don’t tell me you’ve never heard how long the rustling continues, on 
and on! The towering trees of the forest, a hundred spans around, are riddled 
with indentations and holes—like noses, mouths, ears; like sockets, enclosures, 
mortars; like ponds, like puddles. Roarers and whizzers, scolders and sighers, 
shouters, wallers, boomers, growlers! One leads with a yeee! Another answers 
with a yuuu! A light breeze brings a small harmony, while a powerful gale 
makes for a harmony vast and grand. And once the sharp wind has passed, all 
these holes return to their silent emptiness. Have you never seen all the tem­
pered attunements, all the cunning contentions?”
Ziyou said, “So the piping of the earth means just the sound of these hol­
lows. And the piping of man would be the sound of bamboo panpipes. What, 
then, is the piping of Heaven?”
Ziqi said, “It gusts through all the ten thousand differences, allowing each
Chapter Two: Equalizing Assessments ofThings 9
2.1
2:2
2:3
2:4
' “Assessment” here renders lun 1^, meaning a verbally expressed viesvpoint or discus­
sion on some matter, a discourse that weighs relevant factors with much or little argument 
and explanation, but generally with the intent of rendering a judgment and expressing a 
position on what is so and what is right. An attempt is made here to preserve the ambiguity 
of this title, Qiwulun which can be parsed either as 2-1 or as 1-2, thus meaning
either “Assessments that Equalize Things” or “Equalizing the Assessments Made by All Things 
and, by Extension, All Things So Assessed.” The word wu ^, rendered as “thing(s)” here, 
is in other contexts translated as “being(s)” and denotes not only inanimate objects but also 
living creatures and even sometimes abstract entities. In the “commentaries” section, the 
word lun is rendered “theories,” as the sense of the term had taken on this more formal im­
plication by the times in which they were written.
^ The “Vital breath” is qi ^. See Glossary.


10 Zhuangzi: Essential Writings (The Inner Chapters)
to go its o\wn vM^ytiBut Wnoei each one selects out its own, what identity can 
2:5 there be for their rouser?”^
A large consciousness is idle and spacey; a small consciousness is cramped and 
circumspect. Big talk is bland and flavorless; petty talk is detailed and fi'ag- 
2:6 mented. We sleep and our spirits converge; we awake and our bodies open out­
ward. We give, we receive, we act, we construct: all day long we apply our 
minds to struggles against one thing or another—struggles unadorned or strug­
gles concealed, but in either case tightly packed one after another without gap. 
The small fears leave us nervous and depleted; the large fears leave us stunned 
and blank. Shooting forth like an arrow from a bowstring: such is our pre­
sumption when we arbitrate right and wrong. Holding fast as if to sworn oaths: 
such is our defense of our victories. Worn away as if by autumn and winter: 
such is our daily dwindling, drowning us in our own activities, unable to turn 
back. Held fast as if bound by cords, we continue along the same ruts."^ The 
mind is left on the verge of death, and nothing can restore its vitality.
Joy and anger, sorrow and happiness, plans and regrets, transformations and 
stagnations, unguarded abandonment and deliberate posturing—music flow­
ing out of hollows, mushrooms of billowing steam! Day and night they alter­
nate before us, but no one knows whence they sprout. That is enough! That is 
2:7 enough! Is it from all of this, presented ceaselessly day and night, that we come 
to exist? Without that there would be no me, to be sure, but then again with- 
2:8 out me there would be nothing selected out from it all.^ This is certainly some­
thing close to hand, and yet we do not know what makes it so. If there is some 
controller behind it all, it is peculiarly devoid of any manifest sign. Its ability 
to flow and to stop makes its presence plausible, but even then it shows no def­
inite form. That would make it a reality with no definite form.
The hundred bones, the nine openings, the six internal organs are all pres­
ent here as my body. Which one is most dear to me? Do you delight in all 
2:9 equally, or do you have some favorite among them? Or are they all mere ser­
vants and concubines? Are these servants and concubines unable to govern 
each other? Or do they take turns as master and servant? If there exists a gen-
’ An alternate rendering of this important line is: “It blows forth in ten thousand differ­
ent ways, allowing each to go as it will. Each takes what it chooses for itself—but then who 
could it be that activates them all?” And another: “Gusting through this multitude, every one 
of them different, it yet allows each to go its own way. The taking up of something is done 
by themselves, so what rouser could there be?” Many commentators accept the textual vari­
ant yi ^ (“to cease”) for ji ^ (“oneself’), so that the line would perhaps mean: “It blows 
forth the ten thousand differences but also allows them to cease on their own. They take up 
both [their beginning and their ending] on their own accord—who, then, is the rouser?” 
The translation is based on Wang Fuzhi’s reading.
^ Analogously, without the wind there would be no sound, but without the holes there 
would be no particular tone selected out from it and actualized.


Chapter Two: Equalizing Assessments of Things 11
uine ruler among them, then whether we could find out the facts about him 
or not would neither add to nor subtract from that genuineness.
If you regard what you have received as fully formed® once and for all, un­
able to forget it, all the time it survives is just a vigil spent waiting for its end. 
In the process, you grind and lacerate yourself against all the things around 
you. Its activities will be over as quickly as a horse galloping by, unstoppable— 
is it not sad? All your life you labor, and nothing is achieved. Worn and ex­
hausted to the point of collapse, never knowing what it all amounts to—how 
can you not lament this? What good does it do if others say, “To us he is not 
dead”? The body has decayed and the mind went with it. Can this be called 
anything but an enormous sorrow? Is human life always this bewildering, or 
am I the only bewildered one? Is there actually any man, or anything in a man, 
that is not bewildered?
If we follow whatever has so far taken shape, fully formed,^ in our minds, 
making that our teacher, who could ever be without a teacher? The mind 
comes to be what it is by taking possession of whatever it selects out of the 
process of alternation—but does that mean it has to truly understand that 
process? The fool takes something up from it too. But to claim that there are 
any such things as “right” and “wrong” before they come to be fully formed 
in someone’s mind in this way—that is like saying you left for Yue today and 
arrived there yesterday.* * This is to regard the nonexistent as existent. The exis­
tence of the nonexistent is beyond the understanding of even the divine sage- 
king Yu—so what possible sense could it make to someone like me?
“But human speech is not just a blowing of air. Speech has something 
of which it speaks, something it refers to.” Yes, but what it refers to is pecu­
liarly unfixed. So is there really anything it refers to? Or has nothing ever 
been referred to? You take it to be different from the chirping of baby birds. 
But is there really any difference between them? Or is there no difference? Is 
there any dispute, or is there no dispute? Anything demonstrated, or nothing 
demonstrated?
How could courses be so obscured that there could be any question of gen­
uine or fake among them? How could words be so obscured that there could 
be any question of right or wrong among them? Where can you go without it 
being a course? What can you say without it being affirmable? Courses are ob­
scured by the small accomplishments already formed and completed by 
them.^ Words are obscured by the ostentatious blossoms of reputation that 
come with them. Hence we have the rights and wrongs of the Confucians and 
Mohists, each affirming what the other negates and negating what the other
2:10
2:11
2:12
2:13
2:14
® “Fully formed” is cheng J^. See Glossary.
^ Cheng. See Glossary.
* A phrase attributed to Hui Shi; see Ghapter 33.
^ “Fully formed and completed” is the rendering for cheng here. See Glossary.


affirms. But if you want to affirm what they negate and negate what they af- 
2.15 firm, nothing compares to the Illumination of the Obvious:'®
There is no being that is not “that.” There is no being that is not “this.” But 
one cannot be seeing these from the perspective of “that”: one knows them 
only from “this” [i.e., from one’s own perspective]." Thus, we can say: “That” 
emerges from “this,” and “this” follows from “that.” This is the theory of the 
simultaneous generation of “this” and “that.” But by the same token, their si­
multaneous generation is their simultaneous destruction, and vice versa. 
Simultaneous affirmability is simultaneous negatability, and vice versa. What 
is circumstantially right is also circumstantially wrong, and vice versa. Thus, 
the Sage does not proceed from any one of them alone but instead lets them 
all bask in the broad daylight of Heaven. And that too is only a case of going 
2:16 by the rightness of the present “this.”
“This” is also a “that.” “That” is also a “this.” “THAT” posits a “this” and a 
“that”—a right and a wrong—of its own. But “THIS” also posits a “this” and 
a “that”—a right and a wrong—of its own. So is there really any “that” versus 
“this,” any right versus wrong? Or is there really no “that” versus “this”? When 
“this” and “that”—right and wrong—are no longer coupled as opposites—that 
is called the Course as Axis, the axis of all courses.'^ When this axis finds its 
place in the center, it responds to all the endless things it confronts, thwarted 
2:17 by none. For it has an endless supply of “rights,” and an endless supply of 
2:18 “wrongs.” Thus, I say, nothing compares to the Illumination of the Obvious.
To use this finger to show how a finger is not a finger is no match for using 
not-this-finger to show how a finger is not a finger. To use this horse to show that 
a horse is not a horse is no match for using not-this-horse to show that a horse 
2:19 is not a horse. Heaven and earth are one finger. All things are one horse."
12 Zhuangzi: Essential Writings (The Inner Chapters)
'® The phrase yiming (literally, “use of the light/obvious”) is here rendered as
“Illumination of the Obvious.” See yiming in the Glossary.
'' This line constitutes an essential turning point in the discussion, but it is very hard to 
construe. Here, it is interpreted to mean that since we are each restricted to our own per­
spective—our “this”—but at the same time we manifestly have an awareness of other possi­
ble perspectives—since we can say both “this” and “that”—both the “this” and the “that” are 
present here in the “this.” The rest of this paragraph follows from this consideration.
Neither a singular nor a plural reading of dao rM will suffice in this context. The text 
says literally “is called the Course-Axis.” This could imply either the axis of the Course or 
that the Course is an axis.
' ^ An alternate reading of this passage would be something like the following: “To stand 
in the perspective of what is indicated [i.e., ‘this’] to show how what is not indicated [‘that’] 
is entailed in every indication [‘this’] is no match for standing in the perspective that is not 
indicated [‘that’] to show how what is not indicated [‘that’] is entailed in every indication 
[‘this].” 'The rejected alternative in this version is a caricature of a proposition attributed to 
the “logician” Gongsun Long (who is also mentioned in Chapters 17 and 33): “all things are 
capable of being pointed out [lit., ‘fingered’], but pointing out can never be pointed out”


Something is affirmative beeause someone affirms it. Something is negative 
because someone negates it. Courses are formed*"* by someone walking them. 
Things are so by being called so. Whence thus and so? From thus and so being 
affirmed of them. Whence not thus and so? From thus and so being negated of 
them. Each thing necessarily has some place from which it can be affirmed as 
thus and so, and some place from which it can be affirmed as acceptable.
So no thing is not right, no thing is not acceptable. For whatever we may 
define as a beam as opposed to a pillar, as a leper as opposed the great beauty 
Xishi, or whatever might be [firom some perspective] strange, grotesque, un­
canny, or deceptive, there is some course that opens them into one another, 
connecting them to form a oneness. Whenever fragmentation is going on, 
formation, completion,' ^ is also going on. Whenever formation is going on, de­
struction is also going on.
Hence, all things are neither formed nor destroyed, for these two also open 
into each other, connecting to form a oneness. It is only someone who really 
gets all the way through them that can see how the two sides open into each 
other to form a oneness. Such a person would not define rightness in any one 
particular way but would instead entrust it to the everyday function [of each 
being]. Their everyday function is what works for them, and “working” just 
means this opening up into each other, their way of connecting. Opening to
Chapter Two: Equalizing Assessments of Things 13
{wu wu fei zhi, er zhi fei zhi [TfffThis is seemingly meant to show
that the act of indicating “this” always fails to indicate itself, and thus every act of “the point­
ing out of this” is never pointed out as “this,” so the act of indicating some “this” is never it­
self “this.” All other things are “this,” but the pointing out of “this” can never be “this.” A 
“pointer out” or “indicator” can also be interpreted to mean what is pointed out, i.e., “a mean­
ing.” The implication is then that the meaning of a statement is also not the meaning, and 
whatever something may mean, it also means something else besides, which arrives the long 
way around at Zhuangzi’s own point. Zhuangzi too wants to show that “this” is never merely 
“this,” but he suggests an alternate method: to show that this is also that, simply use the Il­
lumination of the Obvious to look at this from the perspective of that. This is then immedi­
ately seen as a that. A similar point is then made with respect to another paradox attributed 
to Gongsun: “A white horse is not a horse.” The point here is that “white horse” and “horse” 
are, strictly speaking, two distinguishable meanings; one indicates a shape and a eolor, and 
the other indicates only a shape; indicating a shape and color is not the same as indicating 
only a shape. So he is using a (white) horse to show that a horse is not a (white) horse. In­
stead, Zhuangzi wants to arrive at the same conclusion—a horse is not a horse, “this” is not 
merely “this” but also “that”—but does so merely by pointing out that if “horse” is defined 
as “this,” it must posit “nonhorseness” as its corresponding “that,” which will also be a “this” 
with its own perspective, for which “horse” is no longer “this.” Whatever I point out as horse 
must follow the “this/that” structure, and the defining of it as “horse” is internal to the per­
spective of the “this,” which is thus undermined when the “this” shifts to the other, nonhorse 
side. Hence, a horse is not a horse.
*‘* “Formed” is cheng. See Glossary.
“Completion” is cheng. See Glossary.


14 Zhuangzi: Essential Writings (The Inner Chapters)
form a connection just means getting what you get: go as far as whatever you 
happen to get to, and leave it at that. It is all just a matter of going by the right­
ness of the present “this.” To be doing this without knowing it, and not because 
you have defined it as right, is called “the Course.”
But to labor your spirit trying to make all things one, without realizing that it 
2:23 is all the same [whether you do so or not], is called “Three in the Morning.”
What is this Three in the Morning? A monkey trainer was distributing chest­
nuts. He said, “I’ll give you three in the morning and four in the evening.” The 
monkeys were furious. “Well then,” he said, “I’ll give you four in the morning 
and three in the evening.” 'The monkeys were delighted. 'This change of de­
scription and arrangement caused no loss, but in one case it brought anger and 
in another delight. He just went by the rightness of their present “this.” Thus, 
the Sage uses various rights and wrongs to harmonize with others and yet re­
mains at rest in the middle of Heaven the Potter’s Wheel.*® This is called 
124 “Walking Two Roads.”
The understanding of the ancients really got all the way there. Where had 
it arrived? To the point where, for some, there had never existed so-called 
things. This is really getting there, as far as you can go. When no things are 
2-25 there, nothing more can be—added!
Next there were those for whom things existed but never any definite 
boundaries between them. Next there were those for whom there were bound­
aries but never any rights and wrongs. When rights and wrongs waxed bright.
*® Or “the Heavenly Potter’s wheel,” “the Potter’s Wheel of the Heavenly,” “the Potter’s 
Wheel of Heaven.” In all of Zhuangzi’s coinages involving the word “Heaven,” it is useful to 
experimentally substitute the words “Natural,” “Undesigned,” “Spontaneous,” or “Skylike.” 
Hence, one might retranslate this phrase as either “Potter’s Wheel of Nature” or, perhaps 
more strikingly, the Skylike Potter s Wheel.” (See tian in Glossary.) The character used here 
for “Potter’s Wheel” also means “equality.” The two meanings converge in the consideration 
of the even distribution of clay made possible by the constant spinning of the wheel: the pot­
ter’s wheel’s very instability, its constant motion, is what makes things equal. Note also that 
Chinese cosmology considers Heaven, the sky, to be “rotating”: the stars and constellations 
turn in the sky, and the seasons—the sky’s varying conditions—are brought in a cyclical se­
quence. This turning of the seasons is what makes things exist and grow. The turning of the 
Potter’s Wheel sky brings life, as the potter’s wheel creates pots. The “Qifa” chapter of the 
Guanzi, a text of Legalist” orientation, states, “To give commands without understanding 
fixed principles is like trying to establish [the directions] of sunrise and sunset while stand­
ing on a turning potter’s wheel.” It is significant that Zhuangzi uses an image of instability 
that others employ to critique the relativism of shifting perspectives as a solution to the same. 
This shows the deliberate irony of the use of the verb “rest” in this context, which is con­
nected to the idea of the unmoving center of the spinning wheel, the stability that exists in 
the midst of this instability without eliminating it: Walking Two Roads. Cf. “the Tranquility 
of Turmoil” of Chapter 6, specifically 6:38.


Chapter Two: Equalizing Assessments of Things 15
the Course began to wane. What set the Course to waning was exactly what 
brought the cherishing of one thing over another to its fullness.'^ 2-26
But is there really any waning versus fullness? Or is there really no such 
thing as waning versus fullness? In a certain sense, there exists waning versus 
fullness. In that sense, we can say that the Zhao family are zither players. But 
in a certain sense, there is no such thing as waning versus fullness. In that sense 
we can say, on the contrary, that the Zhao family are no zither players. 2-27
Zhao Wen’s zither playing. Master Kuang’s baton waving, Huizi’s desk 
slumping—the understanding these three had of their arts flourished richly.
This was what they flourished in, and thus they pursued these arts to the end 
of their days. They delighted in them, and observing that this delight of theirs 
was not shared, they wanted to make it obvious to others. So they tried to make 
others understand as obvious what was not obvious to them, and thus some 
ended their days debating about the obscurities of “hardness” and “whiteness,” 
and Zhao Wen’s son ended his days still grappling with his father’s zither 
strings. Can this be called success, being fully accomplished at something? In 
that case, even I am fully accomplished. Can this be called failure, lacking the 
full accomplishment of something? If so, neither I nor anything else can be 
considered fully accomplished. 2:28
Thus, the Radiance of Drift and Doubt is the sage’s only map. He makes no 
definition of what is right but instead entrusts it to the everyday function of 
each thing. This is what I call the Illumination of the Obvious. 2:29
Now I will try some words here about “this.” But I don’t know if it belongs in 
the same category as “this” or not. For belonging in a category and not belong­
ing in that category themselves form a single category! Being similar is so simi­
lar to being dissimilar! So there is finally no way to keep it different from “that.” 2:30 
Nevertheless, let me try to say it. There is a beginning. There is a not-yet- 
beginning-to-be-a-beginning. There is a not-yet-beginning-to-not-yet-begin-to- 
be-a-beginning. There is existence. There is nonexistence. There is a not-yet- 
beginning-to-be-nonexistence. There is a not-yet-beginning-to-not-yet-begin- 
to-be-nonexistence. Suddenly there is nonexistence. But I do not-yet know 
whether “the existence of nonexistence” is ultimately existence or nonexistence.
Now I have said something. But I do not-yet know: has what I have said re­
ally said anything? Or has it not really said anything? 2:31
Nothing in the world is larger than the tip of a hair in autumn, and Mt. Tai 
is small. No one lives longer than a dead child, and old Pengzu died an early 
death. Heaven and earth are born together with me, and the ten thousand 
things and I are one. 2:32
The single word cheng, depending on its antonym in each case, is translated variously 
as fullness, completion, formation, fully formed, success, or accomplishment in this and the 
preceding passages. See Glossary.


16 Zhuangzi: Essential Writings (The Inner Chapters)
But if we are all one, can there be any words? But since 1 have already de­
clared that we are “one,” can there be no words? The one and the word are al­
ready two, the two and the original unnamed one are three.'® Going on like 
this, even a skilled chronicler could not keep up with it, not to mention a lesser 
man. So even moving from nonexistence to existence we already arrive at 
three—how much more when we move from existence to existence! Rather 
than moving from anywhere to anywhere, then, let us just go by the rightness 
2;33 of whatever is before us as the present “this.”
Now, courses have never had any sealed borders between them, and words 
have never had any constant sustainability.” It is by establishing definitions of 
what is “this,” what is “right,” that boundaries are made. Let me explain what 
I mean by boundaries: There are right and left, then there are classes of things 
and ideas of the proper responses to them,^" then there are roles and disputes, 
then there are competitions and struggles. Let’s call these the Eight Virtues! 
As for the sage, he may admit that something exists beyond the six limits of the 
known world, but he does not further discuss it. As for what is within the known 
world, he will discuss it but not express an opinion on it. As for historical events, 
he will give an opinion but not debate it. For wherever a division is made, some­
thing is left undivided. Wherever debate shows one of two alternatives to be 
right, something remains undistinguished and unshown. What is it? The sage 
hides it in his embrace, while the masses of people debate it, trying to demon­
strate it to one another. Thus I say that demonstration by debate always leaves 
something unseen.
The Great Gourse is unproclaimed. Great demonstration uses no words. 
234 Great Humanity is not humane. Great rectitude is not fastidious. Great 
courage is not invasive. For when the Gourse becomes explicit, it ceases to be 
the Gourse. When words demonstrate by debate, they fail to communicate. 
When Humanity is constantly sustained, it cannot reach its maturity.^' When 
rectitude is pure, it cannot extend itself to others. When courage is invasive, it
*® A. C. Graham’s comment on this passage is unimprovable:
Hui Shih [Huizi] had said that ‘Heaven and earth are one unit’ [see Chapter 33]. At first sight 
one might expect [Zhuangzi] to agree with that at least. But to refuse to distinguish alterna­
tives is to refuse to affirm even “Everything is one” against “Things are many.” He observes that 
in saying it the statement itself is additional to the One which it is about, so that already there 
are two (Plato makes a similar point about the One and its name in The Sophist). It may be no­
ticed that [Zhuangzi] never does say that everything is one (except as one side of a paradox 
[Chapter 5, specifically 5:5]), [but rather] always speaks subjectively of the sage treating [all 
things] as one (Graham, Chuang Tzu, p. 56).
” “Gonstant sustainability” is chang. See Glossary.
“Proper responses” is yi. See ren yi in Glossary.
“Maturity” is cheng.21


cannot succeed.^^ These five are originally round, but they are forced toward 
squareness.
Hence, when the understanding eonsciousness comes to rest in what it does 
not know, it has reached its utmost. The demonstration that uses no words, the 
Course that is not a course—who “understands” these things? If there is some­
thing able to “understand” them [in this sense], it can be called the Heavenly 
Reservoir—poured into without ever getting full, ladled out of without ever 
running out, ever not-knowing its own source.
This is called the Shadowy Splendor.
In aneient times, Yao asked Shun, “I want to attack Zong, Kuai, and Xu’ao, for 
though I sit facing south on the throne, still I am not at ease. Why is this?” 
Shun said, “Though these three may continue to dwell out among the grasses 
and brambles, why should this make you ill at ease? Once upon a time, ten suns 
rose in the sky at onee, and the ten thousand things were all simultaneously il­
luminated. And how mueh better are many Virtuosities than many suns?^"*
Nie Que^^ asked Wang Ni, “Do you know what all things agree in considering 
right?”
Wang Ni said, “How could I know that?”
Nie Que said, “Do you know that you don’t know?”
Wang Ni said, “How could I know that?”
Nie Que said, “Then are all beings devoid of knowledge?”
Wang Ni said, “How eould I know that? Still, let me try to say something 
about this. How could I know that what I call ‘knowing’ is not really ‘not-know- 
ing’? How could I know that what I call ‘not-knowing’ is not really ‘knowing’?
Chapter Two: Equalizing Assessments of Things 17
“Succeed” is cheng.
Or “Skylike Reservoir” instead of “Heavenly Reservoir.” Here, the Heavenly Reservoir 
{tianfu ) is construed as a name not for “the Course that is not a course,” but for what
would be able to “understand it”—i.e., to know it by not knowing it, by coming to rest in 
what it does not know. In other words, the Heavenly Reservoir is the Daoist’s wild-card mind, 
rather than its object, the Course. Note the similar Zhuangzian phrases for Daoist subjec­
tivity, e.g., the “Numinous Reservoir” (lingfu Sffif ; see 5:16). Both “know” and “under­
stand” in this passage are renderings of zhi (see  Glossary).
For Yao and Shun, see 1:9, note 13. According to the Huainanzi, “In the time of Yao, 
ten suns rose in the sky at once, scorching the grains and crops, killing the plants and grasses.” 
The story is meant to show that there can be only a single mler, just as there can be only a 
single sun. Many suns will be “too much of a good thing,” killing off the crops. Hence, Yao 
had nine of the suns shot out of the sky, thereby establishing unified rule. Zhuangzi’s parody 
turns this point on its head. Yao thinks ten different standards of “rightness” will lead to chaos— 
there must be a single unified truth, a single ruler. Zhuangzi here allows all things their own 
rightness—and thereby there will be all the more illumination, with each thing its own sun.
The name Nie Que means “toothless.” Cf 7:1.
2:35
2:36
237
2:38


18 Zhuangzi: Essential Writings (The Inner Chapters)
But now let me take a stab at asking you about it. When people sleep in a damp 
place, they wake up deathly ill and sore about the waist—but what about eels? 
If people live in trees, they tremble with fear and worry—but how about mon­
keys? Of these three, which ‘knows’ what is the right^® place to live? People eat 
the flesh of their livestock, deer eat grass, snakes eat centipedes, hawks and 
eagles eat mice. Of these four, which ‘knows’ the right thing to eat? Monkeys 
take she-monkeys for mates, bucks mount does, male fish frolic with female 
fish, while humans regard Mao Qiang and Lady Li as great beauties—but 
when fish see them they dart into the depths, when birds see them they soar 
into the skies, when deer see them they bolt away without looking back. Which 
of these four ‘knows’ what is rightly alluring? From where I see it, the transi­
tions of Humanity and Responsibility and the trails of right and wrong are 
hopelessly tangled and confused. How could I know how to distinguish which 
is right among them?”
Nie Que said, “If that’s the case, then you can’t even tell benefit from harm. 
Does the Consummate Person really fail to distinguish between benefit and 
harm?”
2:39 Wang Ni said, “The Consummate Person is miraculous, beyond under­
standing! The lakes may burst into flames around him, but this can’t make him 
feel it is too hot. The rivers may freeze over, but this can’t make him feel it is 
too cold. Ferocious thunder may crumble the mountains, the winds may shake 
the seas, but this cannot make him feel startled. Such a person chariots on the 
clouds and winds, piggybacks on the sun and moon, and wanders beyond the 
four seas. Even death and life can do nothing to change him—much less the
2.-40 transitions between benefit and harm!”
Ju Quezi asked Chang Wuzi, “I have heard the Master relating the claim that 
the sage does not engage in projects, does not seek benefit, does not avoid 
harm, does not pursue happiness, does not follow any specific course. He says 
something by saying nothing, and says nothing by saying something, and thus 
does he wander, beyond the dust and grime. The Master considered these rude 
and careless words, but I believe they are the practice of the Mysterious Course. 
What do you think?”
Chang Wuzi said, “These words would send even the Yellow Emperor into 
fevers of confusion. How could Confucius understand them? And you, on the 
contrary, are judging far too prematurely. You see an egg and try to get it to 
crow at dawn; you see a crossbow pellet and try to roast it for your dinner. I’m 
going to try speaking some reckless words. How about listening just as reck­
lessly? While the mass of men are beleaguered and harried, the sage is dim and 
dense, standing shoulder to shoulder with the sun and moon, scooping up time
“Right” is zheng JE , the same word translated in Chapter 1 as “true,” as in the “true 
color [of the sky]” (1:4) and “chariot upon what is true both to Heaven and to earth” (1:8). 
See Glossary.


Chapter Two: Equalizing Assessments of Things 19
and space and smooching them all together, leaving them all to their own slip­
pery mush so that every enslavement is also an ennobling. He is there taking 
part in the diversity of ten thousand harvests, but in each he tastes one and the 
same purity of fully formed maturation.^^ For to him each thing is just so, each 
thing is right, and so he enfolds them all within himself by affirming the right­
ness of each.
“How, then, do I know that delighting in life is not a delusion? How do I 
know that in hating death 1 am not like an orphan who left home in youth and 
no longer knows the way back? Lady Li was a daughter of the border guard of 
Ai. When she was first captured and brought to Qin, she wept until tears 
drenched her collar. But when she got to the palace, sharing the king’s luxuri­
ous bed and feasting on the finest meats, she regretted her tears. How do I know 
that the dead don’t regret the way they used to cling to life? ‘If you dream of 
drinking wine, in the morning you will weep. If you dream of weeping, in the 
morning you will go out hunting.’^® While dreaming you don’t know it’s a 
dream. You might even interpret a dream in your dream—and then you wake 
up and realize it was all a dream.
“Perhaps a great awakening would reveal all of this to be a vast dream. And 
yet, fools imagine they are already awake—how clearly and certainly they 
understand it all! This one is a lord, they decide, that one is a shepherd—what 
prejudice! Confucius and you are both dreaming! And when I say you’re 
dreaming. I’m dreaming too. So if you were to ‘agree’ with these words as right, 
I would name that nothing more than a way of offering condolences for the 
demise of their strangeness.^*^ For actually, even if some great sage shows up af­
ter ten thousand generations who knows how to unravel them, it would still be 
as if he arrived after only a single day.
“Suppose you and I get into a debate. If you win and I lose, does that really 
mean you are right and I am wrong? If I win and you lose, does that really mean 
I’m right and you’re wrong? Must one of us be right and the other wrong? Or 
could both of us be right, or both of us wrong? If neither you nor I can know, 
a third person would be even more benighted. Whom should we have straighten
“Fully formed maturation” is cheng. See Glossary.
This sentence is phrased in the gnomic diction of a dream prognostication text, pos­
sibly quoting a well-known folk belief
This phrase has given commentators many headaches. Zhuangzi’s coinage, used in 
modern Chinese to translate “paradox,” is usually glossed as something like the “Supreme 
Swindle,” or the “Ultimate Monstrosity.” Taking the phrase more literally, the present trans­
lation (“offering condolences for the demise of the strangeness”) is a bit more adventurous. 
The implication is that to merely judge these paradoxical words as “true” or “right” [shi qi 
yan; cf. Chapter 1, note 16) is a way of killing off their salutary strangeness and
then eulogizing the corpse with these laudatory titles. Better to leave them unjudged and 
fully strange, evoking the Radiance of Drift and Doubt.
2:41
2:42
2:43


20 Zhuangzi: Essential Writings (The Inner Chapters)
out’“ the matter? Someone who agrees with you? But since he already agrees 
with you, how can he straighten it out? Someone who agrees with me? But 
since, she already agrees with me, how can he straighten it out? Someone who 
disagrees with both of us? But if he already disagrees with both of us, how 
can he straighten it out? Someone who agrees with both of us? But since he al­
ready agrees with both of us, how can he straighten it out? So neither you nor 
I nor any third party can ever know how it is—shall we wait for yet some 
2:44 “other”^'?
“What is meant by harmonizing with them by means of their Heavenly 
Transitions’^? It means ‘right’ is also ‘not right,’ and ‘so’ is also ‘not so.’ If right 
were ultimately right, its differentiation from not-right would require no de­
bate. If so were ultimately so, its differentiation from not so would require no 
debate. Thus, even though the transforming voices may depend on one an- 
2:45 other, this is tantamount to not depending on” anything at all.’"^
“Harmonize with them all by means of their Heavenly Transitions, follow 
along with them in their limitless overflowings, and you will be able to fully 
live out your years. Forget what year it is, forget what should or should not be.” 
Let yourself be jostled and shaken by the boundlessness—for that is how to be 
2:46 lodged securely in the boundlessness!”
'The penumbra’® said to the shadow, “First you were walking, then you were 
standing still. First you were sitting, then you were upright. Why can’t you de- 
2:47 cide on a single course of action?”
’® “Straighten out” is zheng, as in note 26 of this chapter. See Glossary.
” “Wait for some ‘other’” is dai hi For dai, see 1:8, 2:44, 2:45, 2:48, 4:9, 6:5,
6:29, 7:15, and Glossary. Bi, here translated “other,” is the word used for “that” as opposed 
to “this” earlier in this chapter.
“Heavenly Transitions” is tian ni . This might also be called their Natural Tran­
sitions or, more concretely, their nondeliberate, rotating “Skylike” Transitions. Ni means lit­
erally “beginnings” or “child” on the one hand and “borders” on the other, put together here 
to form the meaning “transitions”—a beginning that crosses a division. The term also figures 
importantly in Ghapter 27.
” “Depending on” is dai See 1:8,2:44, 2:45, 2:48,4:9, 6:5,6:29,7:15, and Glossary.
The sounds of the wind, the voices of the debaters, may depend on and wait for each 
other to render a judgment on which is right and which is wrong, but in fact they can never 
straighten each other out, each being right from its own perspective, so in the end they are not 
mutually dependent at all for their rightness. In fact, it is just their full dependence on each 
other, the mutual entailment of “this” and “that,” that renders them independent. Gf. 1:8.
” “What should or should not be” is yi. See ren yi in Glossary.
’® The “penumbra” is a mythical creature, described as the shadow of the shadow, or the 
faint dimness around the edge of a shadow. But the name means literally “the neither of the 
two,” presenting a conceptual rhyme with “Walking Two Roads.”


Chapter Three: The Primacy of Nourishing Life 21
The shadow said, “Do I depend on’^ something to make me as 1 am? Does 
what I depend on depend on something else? Do I depend on it as a snake 
does on its skin, or a cicada on its shell? How would I know why I am so or not 
so?” 2;4S
Once Zhuang Zhou dreamt he was a butterfly, fluttering about joyfully just as 
a butterfly would. He followed his whims exactly as he liked and knew noth­
ing about Zhuang Zhou. Suddenly he awoke, and there he was, the startled 
Zhuang Zhou in the flesh. He did not know if Zhou had been dreaming he 
was a butterfly, or if a butterfly was now dreaming it was Zhou. Surely, Zhou 
and a butterfly count as two distinct identities! Such is what we call the trans­
formation of one thing into another. 2:49
CHAPTER THREE
The Primacy of Nourishing Life^ 3:1
The flow of my life is bound by its limits; the mind bent on knowledge, how­
ever, never is.^ If forced to follow something limited by no bounds, the 
bounded [current of life] is put in danger. And to meet this danger by en­
hancing knowledge even further—that merely exacerbates the danger. What 3.-2 
it^ does may be “good,” but not to the point of bringing reputation. What it 
does may be “evil,” but not to the point of bringing punishment."* It tends to-
Dai again. See 1:8, 2:44, 2:45,4:9, 6:5, 6:29, 7:15, and Glossary.
’ The title of this chapter could also be interpreted to mean, “Nourishing the Host [or 
Master] of Life,” which is how many of our commentators take it. Alternately, it could mean, 
“What Is Primary in Nourishing Life.”
^ This sentence is often interpreted to mean, “My life is limited, but knowledge is un­
limited.” On this reading, “life” refers to the duration of a human life span, while “knowl­
edge” is interpreted as “the body of knowable things to be learned.” The point would then 
be that my life span is too short to learn all there is to learn, and hence the pursuit of learn­
ing is a futile, even dangerous endeavor. But this reading of both sheng ^ (life) and zhi 
^ (here translated as “the mind bent on knowledge”) is not consistent with the usage of 
those words in the rest of the Inner Chapters, nor the usual usage in texts of this period gen­
erally, where the former refers to the process of coming to be, and the latter primarily to the 
faculty of knowing rather than the field of things to be known. See Glossary. Nonetheless, 
something of this sense of the inexhaustibility of knowables is not irrelevant to the points be­
ing made in this chapter.
’ I.e., the undirected flow of life.
■* These two lines are often read as conditional imperatives: “When you do good, stay 
away from reputation. When you do evil, stay away from punishment.”
