Page 1 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
Existentialism is a HumanismJean-Paul Sartre
My purpose here is to offer a defence of existentialism against several reproaches thathave been laid against it.First, it has been reproached as an invitation to people to dwell in quietism of despair. Forif every way to a solution is barred, one would have to regard any action in this world asentirely ineffective, and one would arrive finally at a contemplative philosophy. Moreover,since contemplation is a luxury, this would be only another bourgeois philosophy. This is,especially, the reproach made by the Communists.From another quarter we are reproached for having underlined all that is ignominious inthe human situation, for depicting what is mean, sordid or base to the neglect of certainthings that possess charm and beauty and belong to the brighter side of human nature:for example, according to the Catholic critic, Mlle. Mercier, we forget how an infantsmiles. Both from this side and from the other we are also reproached for leaving out ofaccount the solidarity of mankind and considering man in isolation. And this, say theCommunists, is because we base our doctrine upon pure subjectivity — upon theCartesian “I think”: which is the moment in which solitary man attains to himself; aposition from which it is impossible to regain solidarity with other men who exist outsideof the self. The ego cannot reach them through the cogito.From the Christian side, we are reproached as people who deny the reality andseriousness of human affairs. For since we ignore the commandments of God and allvalues prescribed as eternal, nothing remains but what is strictly voluntary. Everyone cando what he likes, and will be incapable, from such a point of view, of condemning eitherthe point of view or the action of anyone else.It is to these various reproaches that I shall endeavour to reply today; that is why I haveentitled this brief exposition “Existentialism is a Humanism.” Many may be surprised atthe mention of humanism in this connection, but we shall try to see in what sense weunderstand it. In any case, we can begin by saying that existentialism, in our sense of theword, is a doctrine that does render human life possible; a doctrine, also, which affirmsthat every truth and every action imply both an environment and a human subjectivity.The essential charge laid against us is, of course, that of over-emphasis upon the evilside of human life. I have lately been told of a lady who, whenever she lets slip a vulgarexpression in a moment of nervousness, excuses herself by exclaiming, ‘I believe I ambecoming an existentialist.” So it appears that ugliness is being identified withexistentialism. That is why some people say we are “naturalistic,” and if we are, it isstrange to see how much we scandalise and horrify them, for no one seems to be muchfrightened or humiliated nowadays by what is properly called naturalism. Those who canquite well keep down a novel by Zola such as La Terre are sickened as soon as theyread an existentialist novel. Those who appeal to the wisdom of the people — which is asad wisdom — find ours sadder still. And yet, what could be more disillusioned than such

Page 2 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
sayings as “Charity begins at home” or “Promote a rogue and he’ll sue you for damage,knock him down and he’ll do you homage”? We all know how many common sayings canbe quoted to this effect, and they all mean much the same — that you must not opposethe powers-that-be; that you must not fight against superior force; must not meddle inmatters that are above your station. Or that any action not in accordance with sometradition is mere romanticism; or that any undertaking which has not the support ofproven experience is foredoomed to frustration; and that since experience has shownmen to be invariably inclined to evil, there must be firm rules to restrain them, otherwisewe shall have anarchy. It is, however, the people who are forever mouthing these dismalproverbs and, whenever they are told of some more or less repulsive action, say “Howlike human nature!” — it is these very people, always harping upon realism, whocomplain that existentialism is too gloomy a view of things. Indeed their excessiveprotests make me suspect that what is annoying them is not so much our pessimism, but,much more likely, our optimism. For at bottom, what is alarming in the doctrine that I amabout to try to explain to you is — is it not? — that it confronts man with a possibility ofchoice. To verify this, let us review the whole question upon the strictly philosophic level.What, then, is this that we call existentialism?Most of those who are making use of this word would be highly confused if required toexplain its meaning. For since it has become fashionable, people cheerfully declare thatthis musician or that painter is “existentialist.” A columnist in Clartés signs himself “TheExistentialist,” and, indeed, the word is now so loosely applied to so many things that itno longer means anything at all. It would appear that, for the lack of any novel doctrinesuch as that of surrealism, all those who are eager to join in the latest scandal ormovement now seize upon this philosophy in which, however, they can find nothing totheir purpose. For in truth this is of all teachings the least scandalous and the mostaustere: it is intended strictly for technicians and philosophers. All the same, it can easilybe defined.The question is only complicated because there are two kinds of existentialists. Thereare, on the one hand, the Christians, amongst whom I shall name Jaspers and GabrielMarcel, both professed Catholics; and on the other the existential atheists, amongstwhom we must place Heidegger as well as the French existentialists and myself. Whatthey have in common is simply the fact that they believe that existence comes beforeessence — or, if you will, that we must begin from the subjective. What exactly do wemean by that?If one considers an article of manufacture — as, for example, a book or a paper-knife —one sees that it has been made by an artisan who had a conception of it; and he has paidattention, equally, to the conception of a paper-knife and to the pre-existent technique ofproduction which is a part of that conception and is, at bottom, a formula. Thus the paper-knife is at the same time an article producible in a certain manner and one which, on theother hand, serves a definite purpose, for one cannot suppose that a man would producea paper-knife without knowing what it was for. Let us say, then, of the paper-knife that itsessence — that is to say the sum of the formulae and the qualities which made itsproduction and its definition possible — precedes its existence. The presence of such-and-such a paper-knife or book is thus determined before my eyes. Here, then, we areviewing the world from a technical standpoint, and we can say that production precedesexistence.When we think of God as the creator, we are thinking of him, most of the time, as asupernal artisan. Whatever doctrine we may be considering, whether it be a doctrine likethat of Descartes, or of Leibnitz himself, we always imply that the will follows, more orless, from the understanding or at least accompanies it, so that when God creates heknows precisely what he is creating. Thus, the conception of man in the mind of God iscomparable to that of the paper-knife in the mind of the artisan: God makes man

Page 3 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
according to a procedure and a conception, exactly as the artisan manufactures a paper-knife, following a definition and a formula. Thus each individual man is the realisation of acertain conception which dwells in the divine understanding. In the philosophic atheism ofthe eighteenth century, the notion of God is suppressed, but not, for all that, the idea thatessence is prior to existence; something of that idea we still find everywhere, in Diderot,in Voltaire and even in Kant. Man possesses a human nature; that “human nature,” whichis the conception of human being, is found in every man; which means that each man is aparticular example of a universal conception, the conception of Man. In Kant, thisuniversality goes so far that the wild man of the woods, man in the state of nature and thebourgeois are all contained in the same definition and have the same fundamentalqualities. Here again, the essence of man precedes that historic existence which weconfront in experience.Atheistic existentialism, of which I am a representative, declares with greater consistencythat if God does not exist there is at least one being whose existence comes before itsessence, a being which exists before it can be defined by any conception of it. That beingis man or, as Heidegger has it, the human reality. What do we mean by saying thatexistence precedes essence? We mean that man first of all exists, encounters himself,surges up in the world — and defines himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist seeshim is not definable, it is because to begin with he is nothing. He will not be anything untillater, and then he will be what he makes of himself. Thus, there is no human nature,because there is no God to have a conception of it. Man simply is. Not that he is simplywhat he conceives himself to be, but he is what he wills, and as he conceives himselfafter already existing — as he wills to be after that leap towards existence. Man isnothing else but that which he makes of himself. That is the first principle ofexistentialism. And this is what people call its “subjectivity,” using the word as a reproachagainst us. But what do we mean to say by this, but that man is of a greater dignity than astone or a table? For we mean to say that man primarily exists — that man is, before allelse, something which propels itself towards a future and is aware that it is doing so. Manis, indeed, a project which possesses a subjective life, instead of being a kind of moss, ora fungus or a cauliflower. Before that projection of the self nothing exists; not even in theheaven of intelligence: man will only attain existence when he is what he purposes to be.Not, however, what he may wish to be. For what we usually understand by wishing orwilling is a conscious decision taken — much more often than not — after we have madeourselves what we are. I may wish to join a party, to write a book or to marry — but insuch a case what is usually called my will is probably a manifestation of a prior and morespontaneous decision. If, however, it is true that existence is prior to essence, man isresponsible for what he is. Thus, the first effect of existentialism is that it puts every manin possession of himself as he is, and places the entire responsibility for his existencesquarely upon his own shoulders. And, when we say that man is responsible for himself,we do not mean that he is responsible only for his own individuality, but that he isresponsible for all men. The word “subjectivism” is to be understood in two senses, andour adversaries play upon only one of them. Subjectivism means. on the one hand, thefreedom of the individual subject and, on the other, that man cannot pass beyond humansubjectivity. It is the latter which is the deeper meaning of existentialism. When we saythat man chooses himself, we do mean that every one of us must choose himself; but bythat we also mean that in choosing for himself he chooses for all men. For in effect, of allthe actions a man may take in order to create himself as he wills to be, there is not onewhich is not creative, at the same time, of an image of man such as he believes he oughtto be. To choose between this or that is at the same time to affirm the value of that whichis chosen; for we are unable ever to choose the worse. What we choose is always thebetter; and nothing can be better for us unless it is better for all. If, moreover, existenceprecedes essence and we will to exist at the same time as we fashion our image, thatimage is valid for all and for the entire epoch in which we find ourselves. Ourresponsibility is thus much greater than we had supposed, for it concerns mankind as awhole. If I am a worker, for instance, I may choose to join a Christian rather than a

Page 4 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
Communist trade union. And if, by that membership, I choose to signify that resignationis, after all, the attitude that best becomes a man, that man’s kingdom is not upon thisearth, I do not commit myself alone to that view. Resignation is my will for everyone, andmy action is, in consequence, a commitment on behalf of all mankind. Or if, to take amore personal case, I decide to marry and to have children, even though this decisionproceeds simply from my situation, from my passion or my desire, I am therebycommitting not only myself, but humanity as a whole, to the practice of monogamy. I amthus responsible for myself and for all men, and I am creating a certain image of man as Iwould have him to be. In fashioning myself I fashion man.This may enable us to understand what is meant by such terms — perhaps a littlegrandiloquent — as anguish, abandonment and despair. As you will soon see, it is verysimple. First, what do we mean by anguish?  The existentialist frankly states that man isin anguish. His meaning is as follows — When a man commits himself to anything, fullyrealising that he is not only choosing what he will be, but is thereby at the same time alegislator deciding for the whole of mankind — in such a moment a man cannot escapefrom the sense of complete and profound responsibility. There are many, indeed, whoshow no such anxiety. But we affirm that they are merely disguising their anguish or arein flight from it. Certainly, many people think that in what they are doing they commit noone but themselves to anything: and if you ask them, “What would happen if everyone didso?” they shrug their shoulders and reply, "Everyone does not do so.” But in truth, oneought always to ask oneself what would happen if everyone did as one is doing; nor canone escape from that disturbing thought except by a kind of self-deception. The man wholies in self-excuse, by saying "Everyone will not do it” must be ill at ease in hisconscience, for the act of lying implies the universal value which it denies. By its verydisguise his anguish reveals itself. This is the anguish that Kierkegaard called “theanguish of Abraham.” You know the story: An angel commanded Abraham to sacrifice hisson: and obedience was obligatory, if it really was an angel who had appeared and said,"Thou, Abraham, shalt sacrifice thy son.” But anyone in such a case would wonder, first,whether it was indeed an angel and secondly, whether I am really Abraham. Where arethe proofs? A certain mad woman who suffered from hallucinations said that people weretelephoning to her, and giving her orders. The doctor asked, “But who is it that speaks toyou?” She replied: “He says it is God.” And what, indeed, could prove to her that it wasGod? If an angel appears to me, what is the proof that it is an angel; or, if I hear voices,who can prove that they proceed from heaven and not from hell, or from my ownsubconsciousness or some pathological condition? Who can prove that they are reallyaddressed to me?Who, then, can prove that I am the proper person to impose, by my own choice, myconception of man upon mankind? I shall never find any proof whatever; there will be nosign to convince me of it. If a voice speaks to me, it is still I myself who must decidewhether the voice is or is not that of an angel. If I regard a certain course of action asgood, it is only I who choose to say that it is good and not bad. There is nothing to showthat I am Abraham: nevertheless I also am obliged at every instant to perform actionswhich are examples. Everything happens to every man as though the whole human racehad its eyes fixed upon what he is doing and regulated its conduct accordingly. So everyman ought to say, “Am I really a man who has the right to act in such a manner thathumanity regulates itself by what I do.” If a man does not say that, he is dissembling hisanguish. Clearly, the anguish with which we are concerned here is not one that couldlead to quietism or inaction. It is anguish pure and simple, of the kind well known to allthose who have borne responsibilities. When, for instance, a military leader takes uponhimself the responsibility for an attack and sends a number of men to their death, hechooses to do it and at bottom he alone chooses. No doubt under a higher command, butits orders, which are more general, require interpretation by him and upon thatinterpretation depends the life of ten, fourteen or twenty men. In making the decision, hecannot but feel a certain anguish. All leaders know that anguish. It does not prevent their

Page 5 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
acting, on the contrary it is the very condition of their action, for the action presupposesthat there is a plurality of possibilities, and in choosing one of these, they realize that ithas value only because it is chosen. Now it is anguish of that kind which existentialismdescribes, and moreover, as we shall see, makes explicit through direct responsibilitytowards other men who are concerned. Far from being a screen which could separate usfrom action, it is a condition of action itself.And when we speak of “abandonment” — a favorite word of Heidegger — we only meanto say that God does not exist, and that it is necessary to draw the consequences of hisabsence right to the end. The existentialist is strongly opposed to a certain type ofsecular moralism which seeks to suppress God at the least possible expense. Towards1880, when the French professors endeavoured to formulate a secular morality, they saidsomething like this: God is a useless and costly hypothesis, so we will do without it.However, if we are to have morality, a society and a law-abiding world, it is essential thatcertain values should be taken seriously; they must have an a priori existence ascribed tothem. It must be considered obligatory a priori to be honest, not to lie, not to beat one’swife, to bring up children and so forth; so we are going to do a little work on this subject,which will enable us to show that these values exist all the same, inscribed in anintelligible heaven although, of course, there is no God. In other word — and this is, Ibelieve, the purport of all that we in France call radicalism — nothing will be changed ifGod does not exist; we shall rediscover the same norms of honesty, progress andhumanity, and we shall have disposed of God as an out-of-date hypothesis which will dieaway quietly of itself. The existentialist, on the contrary, finds it extremely embarrassingthat God does not exist, for there disappears with Him all possibility of finding values inan intelligible heaven. There can no longer be any good a priori, since there is no infiniteand perfect consciousness to think it. It is nowhere written that “the good” exists, that onemust be honest or must not lie, since we are now upon the plane where there are onlymen. Dostoevsky once wrote "If God did not exist, everything would be permitted”; andthat, for existentialism, is the starting point. Everything is indeed permitted if God doesnot exist, and man is in consequence forlorn, for he cannot find anything to depend uponeither within or outside himself. He discovers forthwith, that he is without excuse. For ifindeed existence precedes essence, one will never be able to explain one’s action byreference to a given and specific human nature; in other words, there is no determinism— man is free, man is freedom. Nor, on the other hand, if God does not exist, are weprovided with any values or commands that could legitimise our behaviour. Thus we haveneither behind us, nor before us in a luminous realm of values, any means of justificationor excuse. — We are left alone, without excuse. That is what I mean when I say that manis condemned to be free. Condemned, because he did not create himself, yet isnevertheless at liberty, and from the moment that he is thrown into this world he isresponsible for everything he does. The existentialist does not believe in the power ofpassion. He will never regard a grand passion as a destructive torrent upon which a manis swept into certain actions as by fate, and which, therefore, is an excuse for them. Hethinks that man is responsible for his passion. Neither will an existentialist think that aman can find help through some sign being vouchsafed upon earth for his orientation: forhe thinks that the man himself interprets the sign as he chooses. He thinks that everyman, without any support or help whatever, is condemned at every instant to invent man.As Ponge has written in a very fine article, “Man is the future of man.” That is exactly true.Only, if one took this to mean that the future is laid up in Heaven, that God knows what itis, it would be false, for then it would no longer even be a future. If, however, it meansthat, whatever man may now appear to be, there is a future to be fashioned, a virginfuture that awaits him — then it is a true saying. But in the present one is forsaken.As an example by which you may the better understand this state of abandonment, I willrefer to the case of a pupil of mine, who sought me out in the following circumstances.His father was quarrelling with his mother and was also inclined to be a “collaborator”; hiselder brother had been killed in the German offensive of 1940 and this young man, with a

Page 6 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
sentiment somewhat primitive but generous, burned to avenge him. His mother was livingalone with him, deeply afflicted by the semi-treason of his father and by the death of hereldest son, and her one consolation was in this young man. But he, at this moment, hadthe choice between going to England to join the Free French Forces or of staying nearhis mother and helping her to live. He fully realised that this woman lived only for him andthat his disappearance — or perhaps his death — would plunge her into despair. He alsorealised that, concretely and in fact, every action he performed on his mother’s behalfwould be sure of effect in the sense of aiding her to live, whereas anything he did in orderto go and fight would be an ambiguous action which might vanish like water into sandand serve no purpose. For instance, to set out for England he would have to waitindefinitely in a Spanish camp on the way through Spain; or, on arriving in England or inAlgiers he might be put into an office to fill up forms. Consequently, he found himselfconfronted by two very different modes of action; the one concrete, immediate, butdirected towards only one individual; and the other an action addressed to an endinfinitely greater, a national collectivity, but for that very reason ambiguous — and it mightbe frustrated on the way. At the same time, he was hesitating between two kinds ofmorality; on the one side the morality of sympathy, of personal devotion and, on the otherside, a morality of wider scope but of more debatable validity. He had to choose betweenthose two. What could help him to choose? Could the Christian doctrine? No. Christiandoctrine says: Act with charity, love your neighbour, deny yourself for others, choose theway which is hardest, and so forth. But which is the harder road? To whom does one owethe more brotherly love, the patriot or the mother? Which is the more useful aim, thegeneral one of fighting in and for the whole community, or the precise aim of helping oneparticular person to live? Who can give an answer to that a priori? No one. Nor is it givenin any ethical scripture. The Kantian ethic says, Never regard another as a means, butalways as an end. Very well; if I remain with my mother, I shall be regarding her as theend and not as a means: but by the same token I am in danger of treating as meansthose who are fighting on my behalf; and the converse is also true, that if I go to the aid ofthe combatants I shall be treating them as the end at the risk of treating my mother as ameans. If values are uncertain, if they are still too abstract to determine the particular,concrete case under consideration, nothing remains but to trust in our instincts. That iswhat this young man tried to do; and when I saw him he said, “In the end, it is feeling thatcounts; the direction in which it is really pushing me is the one I ought to choose. If I feelthat I love my mother enough to sacrifice everything else for her — my will to beavenged, all my longings for action and adventure then I stay with her. If, on the contrary,I feel that my love for her is not enough, I go.” But how does one estimate the strength ofa feeling? The value of his feeling for his mother was determined precisely by the factthat he was standing by her. I may say that I love a certain friend enough to sacrificesuch or such a sum of money for him, but I cannot prove that unless I have done it. I maysay, “I love my mother enough to remain with her,” if actually I have remained with her. Ican only estimate the strength of this affection if I have performed an action by which it isdefined and ratified. But if I then appeal to this affection to justify my action, I find myselfdrawn into a vicious circle.Moreover, as Gide has very well said, a sentiment which is play-acting and one which isvital are two things that are hardly distinguishable one from another. To decide that I lovemy mother by staying beside her, and to play a comedy the upshot of which is that I doso — these are nearly the same thing. In other words, feeling is formed by the deeds thatone does; therefore I cannot consult it as a guide to action. And that is to say that I canneither seek within myself for an authentic impulse to action, nor can I expect, from someethic, formulae that will enable me to act. You may say that the youth did, at least, go to aprofessor to ask for advice. But if you seek counsel — from a priest, for example — youhave selected that priest; and at bottom you already knew, more or less, what he wouldadvise. In other words, to choose an adviser is nevertheless to commit oneself by thatchoice. If you are a Christian, you will say, Consult a priest; but there arecollaborationists, priests who are resisters and priests who wait for the tide to turn: which

Page 7 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
will you choose? Had this young man chosen a priest of the resistance, or one of thecollaboration, he would have decided beforehand the kind of advice he was to receive.Similarly, in coming to me, he knew what advice I should give him, and I had but onereply to make. You are free, therefore choose that is to say, invent. No rule of generalmorality can show you what you ought to do: no signs are vouchsafed in this world. TheCatholics will reply, “Oh, but they are!” Very well; still, it is I myself, in every case, whohave to interpret the signs. While I was imprisoned, I made the acquaintance of asomewhat remarkable man, a Jesuit, who had become a member of that order in thefollowing manner. In his life he had suffered a succession of rather severe setbacks. Hisfather had died when he was a child, leaving him in poverty, and he had been awarded afree scholarship in a religious institution, where he had been made continually to feel thathe was accepted for charity’s sake, and, in consequence, he had been denied several ofthose distinctions and honours which gratify children. Later, about the age of eighteen, hecame to grief in a sentimental affair; and finally, at twenty-two — this was a trifle in itself,but it was the last drop that overflowed his cup — he failed in his military examination.This young man, then, could regard himself as a total failure: it was a sign — but a sign ofwhat? He might have taken refuge in bitterness or despair. But he took it — very cleverlyfor him — as a sign that he was not intended for secular success, and that only theattainments of religion, those of sanctity and of faith, were accessible to him. Heinterpreted his record as a message from God, and became a member of the Order. Whocan doubt but that this decision as to the meaning of the sign was his, and his alone?One could have drawn quite different conclusions from such a series of reverses — as,for example, that he had better become a carpenter or a revolutionary. For thedecipherment of the sign, however, he bears the entire responsibility. That is what“abandonment” implies, that we ourselves decide our being. And with this abandonmentgoes anguish.As for “despair,” the meaning of this expression is extremely simple. It merely means thatwe limit ourselves to a reliance upon that which is within our wills, or within the sum of theprobabilities which render our action feasible. Whenever one wills anything, there arealways these elements of probability. If I am counting upon a visit from a friend, who maybe coming by train or by tram, I presuppose that the train will arrive at the appointed time,or that the tram will not be derailed. I remain in the realm of possibilities; but one does notrely upon any possibilities beyond those that are strictly concerned in one’s action.Beyond the point at which the possibilities under consideration cease to affect my action,I ought to disinterest myself. For there is no God and no prevenient design, which canadapt the world and all its possibilities to my will. When Descartes said, “Conqueryourself rather than the world,” what he meant was, at bottom, the same — that weshould act without hope.Marxists, to whom I have said this, have answered: “Your action is limited, obviously, byyour death; but you can rely upon the help of others. That is, you can count both uponwhat the others are doing to help you elsewhere, as in China and in Russia, and uponwhat they will do later, after your death, to take up your action and carry it forward to itsfinal accomplishment which will be the revolution. Moreover you must rely upon this; notto do so is immoral.” To this I rejoin, first, that I shall always count upon my comrades-in-arms in the struggle, in so far as they are committed, as I am, to a definite, commoncause; and in the unity of a party or a group which I can more or less control — that is, inwhich I am enrolled as a militant and whose movements at every moment are known tome. In that respect, to rely upon the unity and the will of the party is exactly like myreckoning that the train will run to time or that the tram will not be derailed. But I cannotcount upon men whom I do not know, I cannot base my confidence upon humangoodness or upon man’s interest in the good of society, seeing that man is free and thatthere is no human nature which I can take as foundational. I do not know where theRussian revolution will lead. I can admire it and take it as an example in so far as it isevident, today, that the proletariat plays a part in Russia which it has attained in no other

Page 8 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
nation. But I cannot affirm that this will necessarily lead to the triumph of the proletariat: Imust confine myself to what I can see. Nor can I be sure that comrades-in-arms will takeup my work after my death and carry it to the maximum perfection, seeing that those menare free agents and will freely decide, tomorrow, what man is then to be. Tomorrow, aftermy death, some men may decide to establish Fascism, and the others may be socowardly or so slack as to let them do so. If so, Fascism will then be the truth of man, andso much the worse for us. In reality, things will be such as men have decided they shallbe. Does that mean that I should abandon myself to quietism? No. First I ought to commitmyself and then act my commitment, according to the time-honoured formula that “oneneed not hope in order to undertake one’s work.” Nor does this mean that I should notbelong to a party, but only that I should be without illusion and that I should do what I can.For instance, if I ask myself “Will the social ideal as such, ever become a reality?” Icannot tell, I only know that whatever may be in my power to make it so, I shall do;beyond that, I can count upon nothing.Quietism is the attitude of people who say, “let others do what I cannot do.” The doctrine Iam presenting before you is precisely the opposite of this, since it declares that there isno reality except in action. It goes further, indeed, and adds, “Man is nothing else butwhat he purposes, he exists only in so far as he realises himself, he is therefore nothingelse but the sum of his actions, nothing else but what his life is.” Hence we can wellunderstand why some people are horrified by our teaching. For many have but oneresource to sustain them in their misery, and that is to think, “Circumstances have beenagainst me, I was worthy to be something much better than I have been. I admit I havenever had a great love or a great friendship; but that is because I never met a man or awoman who were worthy of it; if I have not written any very good books, it is because Ihad not the leisure to do so; or, if I have had no children to whom X could devote myself itis because I did not find the man I could have lived with. So there remains within me awide range of abilities, inclinations and potentialities, unused but perfectly viable, whichendow me with a worthiness that could never be inferred from the mere history of myactions.” But in reality and for the existentialist, there is no love apart from the deeds oflove; no potentiality of love other than that which is manifested in loving; there is nogenius other than that which is expressed in works of art. The genius of Proust is thetotality of the works of Proust; the genius of Racine is the series of his tragedies, outsideof which there is nothing. Why should we attribute to Racine the capacity to write yetanother tragedy when that is precisely what he — did not write? In life, a man commitshimself, draws his own portrait and there is nothing but that portrait. No doubt this thoughtmay seem comfortless to one who has not made a success of his life. On the other hand,it puts everyone in a position to understand that reality alone is reliable; that dreams,expectations and hopes serve to define a man only as deceptive dreams abortive hopes,expectations unfulfilled; that is to say, they define him negatively, not positively.Nevertheless, when one says, “You are nothing else but what you live,” it does not implythat an artist is to be judged solely by his works of art, for a thousand other thingscontribute no less to his definition as a man. What we mean to say is that a man is noother than a series of undertakings, that he is the sum, the organisation, the set ofrelations that constitute these undertakings.In the light of all this, what people reproach us with is not, after all, our pessimism, but thesternness of our optimism. If people condemn our works of fiction, in which we describecharacters that are base, weak, cowardly and sometimes even frankly evil, it is not onlybecause those characters are base, weak, cowardly or evil. For suppose that, like Zola,we showed that the behaviour of these characters was caused by their heredity, or by theaction of their environment upon them, or by determining factors, psychic or organic.People would be reassured, they would say, “You see, that is what we are like, no onecan do anything about it.” But the existentialist, when he portrays a coward, shows him asresponsible for his cowardice. He is not like that on account of a cowardly heart or lungsor cerebrum, he has not become like that through his physiological organism; he is like

Page 9 of 14 | Sartre, EIH
that because he has made himself into a cowardly actions. There is no such thing as acowardly temperament. There are nervous temperaments; there is what is calledimpoverished blood, and there are also rich temperaments. But the man whose blood ispoor is not a coward for all that, for what produces cowardice is the act of giving up orgiving way; and a temperament is not an action. A coward is defined by the deed that hehas done. What people feel obscurely, and with horror, is that the coward as we presenthim is guilty of being a coward. What people would prefer would be to be born either acoward or a hero. One of the charges most often laid against the Chemins de la Liberte.is something like this “But, after all, these people being so base, how can you make theminto heroes?” That objection is really rather comic, for it implies that people are bornheroes: and that is, at bottom, what such people would like to think. If you are borncowards, you can be quite content, you can do nothing about it and you will be cowardsall your lives whatever you do; and if you are born heroes you can again be quite content;you will be heroes all your lives eating and drinking heroically. Whereas the existentialistsays that the coward makes himself cowardly, the hero makes himself heroic; and thatthere is always a possibility for the coward to give up cowardice and for the hero to stopbeing a hero. What counts is the total commitment, and it is not by a particular case orparticular action that you are committed altogether.We have now, I think, dealt with a certain number of the reproaches againstexistentialism. You have seen that it cannot be regarded as a philosophy of quietismsince it defines man by his action; nor as a pessimistic description of man, for no doctrineis more optimistic, the destiny of man is placed within himself. Nor is it an attempt todiscourage man from action since it tells him that there is no hope except in his action,and that the one thing which permits him to have life is the deed. Upon this leveltherefore, what we are considering is an ethic of action and self-commitment. However,we are still reproached, upon these few data, for confining man within his individualsubjectivity. There again people badly misunderstand us.Our point of departure is, indeed, the subjectivity of the individual, and that for strictlyphilosophic reasons. It is not because we are bourgeois, but because we seek to baseour teaching upon the truth, and not upon a collection of fine theories, full of hope butlacking real foundations. And at the point of departure there cannot be any other truththan this, I think, therefore I am, which is the absolute truth of consciousness as it attainsto itself. Every theory which begins with man, outside of this moment of self-attainment, isa theory which thereby suppresses the truth, for outside of the Cartesian cogito, allobjects are no more than probable, and any doctrine of probabilities which is not attachedto a truth will crumble into nothing. In order to define the probable one must possess thetrue. Before there can be any truth whatever, then, there must be an absolute truth, andthere is such a truth which is simple, easily attained and within the reach of everybody; itconsists in one’s immediate sense of one’s self.In the second place, this theory alone is compatible with the dignity of man, it is the onlyone which does not make man into an object. All kinds of materialism lead one to treatevery man including oneself as an object — that is, as a set of pre-determined reactions,in no way different from the patterns of qualities and phenomena which constitute a table,or a chair or a stone. Our aim is precisely to establish the human kingdom as a pattern ofvalues in distinction from the material world. But the subjectivity which we thus postulateas the standard of truth is no narrowly individual subjectivism, for as we havedemonstrated, it is not only one’s own self that one discovers in the cogito, but those ofothers too. Contrary to the philosophy of Descartes, contrary to that of Kant, when we say“I think” we are attaining to ourselves in the presence of the other, and we are just ascertain of the other as we are of ourselves. Thus the man who discovers himself directlyin the cogito also discovers all the others, and discovers them as the condition of his ownexistence. He recognises that he cannot be anything (in the sense in which one says oneis spiritual, or that one is wicked or jealous) unless others recognise him as such. I