Its Meaning 185
2
What Utilitarianism Is
1. A passing remark is all that needs be given to the ignorant blunder of sup-
posing that those who stand up for utility as the test of right and wrong, use the
term in that restricted and merely colloquial sense in which utility is opposed
to pleasure. An apology is due to the philosophical opponents of utilitarianism,
for even the momentary appearance of confounding them with anyone capable
of so absurd a misconception; which is the more extraordinary, inasmuch as
the contrary accusation, of referring everything to pleasure, and that too in its
grossest form, is another of the common charges against utilitarianism: and, as
has been pointedly remarked by an able writer, the same sort of persons, and
often the very same persons, denounce the theory ‘as impracticably dry when
the word utility precedes the word pleasure, and as too practicably voluptuous
when the word pleasure precedes the word utility.’ Those who know anything
about the matter are aware that every writer, from Epicurus to Bentham, who
maintained the theory of utility, meant by it, not something to be contra-
distinguished from pleasure, but pleasure itself, together with exemption from
pain; and instead of opposing the useful to the agreeable or the ornamental, have
always declared that the useful means these, among other things. Yet the com-
mon herd, including the herd of writers, not only in newspapers and periodicals,
but in books of weight and pretension, are perpetually falling into this shallow
mistake. Having caught up the word utilitarian, while knowing nothing what-
ever about it but its sound, they habitually express by it the rejection, or the
neglect, of pleasure in some of its forms; of beauty, of ornament, or of amuse-
ment. Nor is the term thus ignorantly misapplied solely in disparagement, but
occasionally in compliment; as though it implied superiority to frivolity and the
mere pleasures of the moment. And this perverted use is the only one in which
the word is popularly known, and the one from which the new generation are
acquiring their sole notion of its meaning. Those who introduced the word, but
who had for many years discontinued it as a distinctive appellation, may well

186 Utilitarianism
feel themselves called upon to resume it, if by doing so they can hope to con-
tribute anything towards rescuing it from this utter degradation.*
2. The creed which accepts as the foundation of morals, Utility, or the
Greatest Happiness Principle, holds that actions are right in proportion as they
tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of hap-
piness. By happiness is intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by unhappiness,
pain, and the privation of pleasure. To give a clear view of the moral standard
set up by the theory, much more requires to be said; in particular, what things
it includes in the ideas of pain and pleasure; and to what extent this is left an
open question. But these supplementary explanations do not affect the theory of
life on which this theory of morality is grounded – namely, that pleasure, and
freedom from pain, are the only things desirable as ends; and that all desirable
things (which are as numerous in the utilitarian as in any other scheme) are
desirable either for the pleasure inherent in themselves, or as means to the pro-
motion of pleasure and the prevention of pain.
3. Now, such a theory of life excites in many minds, and among them in
some of the most estimable in feeling and purpose, inveterate dislike. To sup-
pose that life has (as they express it) no higher end than pleasure – no better and
nobler object of desire and pursuit – they designate as utterly mean and grovel-
ling; as a doctrine worthy only of swine, to whom the followers of Epicurus
were, at a very early period, contemptuously likened; and modern holders of the
doctrine are occasionally made the subject of equally polite comparisons by its
German, French and English assailants.
4. When thus attacked, the Epicureans have always answered, that it is not
they, but their accusers, who represent human nature in a degrading light; since
the accusation supposes human beings to be capable of no pleasures except those
of which swine are capable. If this supposition were true, the charge could not
be gainsaid, but would then be no longer an imputation; for if the sources of
pleasure were precisely the same to human beings and to swine, the rule of life
which is good enough for the one would be good enough for the other. The
comparison of the Epicurean life to that of beasts is felt as degrading, precisely
because a beast’s pleasures do not satisfy a human being’s conceptions of happiness.
* The author of this essay has reason for believing himself to be the ﬁrst person who brought
the word utilitarian into use. He did not invent it, but adopted it from a passing expression in
Mr Galt ’s Annals of the Parish . After using it as a designation for several years, he and others
abandoned it from a growing dislike to anything resembling a badge or watchword of sectarian
distinction. But as a name for one single opinion, not a set of opinions – to denote the recognition
of utility as a standard, not any particular way of applying it – the term supplies a want in the
language, and offers, in many cases, a convenient mode of avoiding tiresome circumlocution.

Its Meaning 187
Human beings have faculties more elevated than the animal appetites, and when
once made conscious of them, do not regard anything as happiness which does
not include their gratiﬁcation. I do not, indeed, consider the Epicureans to have
been by any means faultless in drawing out their scheme of consequences from
the utilitarian principle. To do this in any suf ﬁcient manner, many Stoic, as well
as Christian elements require to be included. But there is no known Epicurean
theory of life which does not assign to the pleasures of the intellect, of the feel-
ings and imagination, and of the moral sentiments, a much higher value as pleasures
than to those of mere sensation. It must be admitted, however, that utilitarian
writers in general have placed the superiority of mental over bodily pleasures
chieﬂy in the greater permanency, safety, uncostliness, &c., of the former – that
is, in their circumstantial advantages rather than in their intrinsic nature. And on
all these points utilitarians have fully proved their case; but they might have taken
the other, and, as it may be called, higher ground, with entire consistency. It is
quite compatible with the principle of utility to recognize the fact, that somekinds
of pleasure are more desirable and more valuable than others. It would be absurd
that while, in estimating all other things, quality is considered as well as quantity,
the estimation of pleasures should be supposed to depend on quantity alone.
5. If I am asked, what I mean by difference of quality in pleasures, or what
makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a pleasure, except
its being greater in amount, there is but one possible answer. Of two pleasures,
if there be one to which all or almost all who have experience of both give
a decided preference, irrespective of any feeling of moral obligation to prefer
it, that is the more desirable pleasure. If one of the two is, by those who are
competently acquainted with both, placed so far above the other that they prefer
it, even though knowing it to be attended with a greater amount of discontent,
and would not resign it for any quantity of the other pleasure which their nature
is capable of, we are justiﬁed in ascribing to the preferred enjoyment a superior-
ity in quality, so far outweighing quantity as to render it, in comparison, of small
account.
6. Now it is an unquestionable fact that those who are equally acquainted
with, and equally capable of appreciating and enjoying, both, do give a most
marked preference to the manner of existence which employs their higher
faculties. Few human creatures would consent to be changed into any of the
lower animals, for a promise of the fullest allowance of a beast ’s pleasures; no
intelligent human being would consent to be a fool, no instructed person would
be an ignoramus, no person of feeling and conscience would be sel ﬁsh and base,
even though they should be persuaded that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal is
better satis ﬁed with his lot than they are with theirs. They would not resign
what they possess more than he, for the most complete satisfaction of all the

188 Utilitarianism
desires which they have in common with him. If they ever fancy they would, it
is only in cases of unhappiness so extreme, that to escape from it they would
exchange their lot for almost any other, however undesirable in their own eyes.
A being of higher faculties requires more to make him happy, is capable prob-
ably of more acute suffering, and is certainly accessible to it at more points, than
one of an inferior type; but in spite of these liabilities, he can never really wish
to sink into what he feels to be a lower grade of existence. We may give what
explanation we please of this unwillingness; we may attribute it to pride, a name
which is given indiscriminately to some of the most and to some of the least
estimable feelings of which mankind are capable; we may refer it to the love of
liberty and personal independence, an appeal to which was with the Stoics one
of the most effective means for the inculcation of it; to the love of power, or to
the love of excitement, both of which do really enter into and contribute to it:
but its most appropriate appellation is a sense of dignity, which all human beings
possess in one form or other, and in some, though by no means in exact, pro-
portion to their higher faculties, and which is so essential a part of the happiness
of those in whom it is strong, that nothing which con ﬂicts with it could be,
otherwise than momentarily, an object of desire to them. Whoever supposes
that this preference takes place at a sacri ﬁce of happiness – that the superior
being, in anything like equal circumstances, is not happier than the inferior –
confounds the two very different ideas, of happiness, and content. It is indisput-
able that the being whose capacities of enjoyment are low, has the greatest
chance of having them fully satis ﬁed; and a highly endowed being will always
feel that any happiness which he can look for, as the world is constituted, is
imperfect. But he can learn to bear its imperfections, if they are at all bearable;
and they will not make him envy the being who is indeed unconscious of the
imperfections, but only because he feels not at all the good which those imper-
fections qualify. It is better to be a human being dissatis ﬁed than a pig satis ﬁed;
better to be Socrates dissatis ﬁed than a fool satis ﬁed. And if the fool, or the pig,
is of a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the
question. The other party to the comparison knows both sides.
7. It may be objected, that many who are capable of the higher pleasures,
occasionally, under the in ﬂuence of temptation, postpone them to the lower.
But this is quite compatible with a full appreciation of the intrinsic superiority of
the higher. Men often, from in ﬁrmity of character, make their election for the
nearer good, though they know it to be the less valuable; and this no less when
the choice is between two bodily pleasures, than when it is between bodily
and mental. They pursue sensual indulgences to the injury of health, though
perfectly aware that health is the greater good. It may be further objected, that
many who begin with youthful enthusiasm for everything noble, as they advance

Its Meaning 189
in years sink into indolence and sel ﬁshness. But I do not believe that those who
undergo this very common change, voluntarily choose the lower description of
pleasures in preference to the higher. I believe that before they devote them-
selves exclusively to the one, they have already become incapable of the other.
Capacity for the nobler feelings is in most natures a very tender plant, easily
killed, not only by hostile in ﬂuences, but by mere want of sustenance; and in
the majority of young persons it speedily dies away if the occupations to which
their position in life has devoted them, and the society into which it has thrown
them, are not favourable to keeping that higher capacity in exercise. Men lose
their high aspirations as they lose their intellectual tastes, because they have not
time or opportunity for indulging them; and they addict themselves to inferior
pleasures, not because they deliberately prefer them, but because they are either
the only ones to which they have access, or the only ones which they are any
longer capable of enjoying. It may be questioned whether any one who has
remained equally susceptible to both classes of pleasures, ever knowingly and
calmly preferred the lower; though many, in all ages, have broken down in an
ineffectual attempt to combine both.
8. From this verdict of the only competent judges, I apprehend there can be
no appeal. On a question which is the best worth having of two pleasures, or
which of two modes of existence is the most grateful to the feelings, apart from
its moral attributes and from its consequences, the judgment of those who are
qualiﬁed by knowledge of both, or, if they differ, that of the majority among
them, must be admitted as ﬁnal. And there needs be the less hesitation to accept
this judgment respecting the quality of pleasures, since there is no other tribunal
to be referred to even on the question of quantity. What means are there of
determining which is the acutest of two pains, or the intensest of two pleasur-
able sensations, except the general suffrage of those who are familiar with both?
Neither pains nor pleasures are homogeneous, and pain is always heterogeneous
with pleasure. What is there to decide whether a particular pleasure is worth
purchasing at the cost of a particular pain, except the feelings and judgment
of the experienced? When, therefore, those feelings and judgment declare the
pleasures derived from the higher faculties to be preferable in kind, apart from
the question of intensity, to those of which the animal nature, disjoined from
the higher faculties, is susceptible, they are entitled on this subject to the same
regard.
9. I have dwelt on this point, as being a necessary part of a perfectly just
conception of Utility or Happiness, considered as the directive rule of human
conduct. But it is by no means an indispensable condition to the acceptance of
the utilitarian standard; for that standard is not the agent’s own greatest happiness,
but the greatest amount of happiness altogether; and if it may possibly be doubted