6
Emotional State
I have diligently numbered the days of pure and genuine happiness which 
have feUen to my lot; they amount to fourteen.
Abd-El-Raham*
1. INTRODUCTION
Probably most languages have some counterpart to ‘happiness’ in its oldest 
meaning, a term for prosperity, good fortune, ot “good hap”—roughly, well­
being. This is the concept likely invoked at weddings, births, and other major 
events where we wish, utterly vaguely, for the individuals’ lives to go well for 
them: “May the newlyweds meet with happiness in their life together.” Once 
upon a time, this may have been conceptual apparatus enough for the general 
lot: the life of enviable fortune tended to be just that—mainly a matter of 
luck—with little point in troubling yourself about how well you were actually 
doing in that regard. Moreover, your well-being was at best a secondary concern. 
What mattered then—and still today in many parts of the world—was less 
a matter of personal fulfillment and more a matter of your family’s material 
wealth and social standing. You married for cattle, not love, and he who died 
with the most cows won. If you didn’t like cows, or your spouse, tough; no one 
was asking.
Once we started to regard the individual’s welfare as a top priority, and to 
believe that something could actually be done about it, we needed a richer 
vocabulary. The problem has been clear since human beings first setded down 
and started accumulating things: outward prosperity and success hardly guarantee 
personal flourishing; Abd-El-Raham found this out the hard way, after over fifty 
years of seemingly unblemished good luck, with little to complain about, left 
the tenth century Caliph of Cordoba desirous to complain. You can seem to be 
wildly successful in outward terms and yet fail in achieving a happy life; so too 
can the seemingly unsuccessful appear to thrive. If we want to promote and assess 
individual well-being, we will need to focus on more substantive and concrete 
matters than just formal, abstract notions like well-being or good fortune, since 
it is not obvious what these things amount to. Since the traditional emphasis 
on material endowments and public accomplishment plainly fails to suffice, we


106 Part II: The NaPure of Happiness
need concepts bearing on how well these things serve the person: never mind 
just what you’ve got or what has happened in your life; how 3.K you doing? We 
need, in addition to concepts regarding the condition of a person’s life, concepts 
addressing the person’s condition. The concept of health is one such, but it shares 
with external goods the difficulty that one can easily fare well with it yet still fall 
far short of flourishing or a happy life. Good health is more or less necessary, but 
not even close to sufficient, for well-being. Clearly, the missing element here is 
how all these things relate to the person’s inner life: not her physical condition, 
but her psychological condition. Does the person flourish psychologically? If not, 
then the person does not flourish at all. If so, then the person probably does 
flourish—or so, at any rate, it seems. This, if we can pull it oflF, is a wonderful 
result: here we have a concrete, substantive good that most of us can agree is, if 
not sufficient for well-being, then so central to it that we can regard this item as 
a convenient proxy for it.
What shall the word be for this psychological condition? Since a person’s 
being in this condition (enough of the time) appears almost to suffice for a happy 
life, why not adapt the familiar term and say, then, that the person is happy? 
And so it makes perfect sense—as it would not given the original meaning 
of the term—to sharpen our hopes for the newborn infant by expressing our 
desire that she be “happy and healthy” throughout her days. Now the term 
is no longer an evaluation of a life, but a description of a person’s psycho­
logical condition. This is the psychological sense of the word identified in 
Chapter 2.
The aim of this chapter is to argue, in light of the reflections of the preceding 
chapters, that this condition is most profitably understood as a matter of a 
person’s emotional condition. I will begin with a default version of the emotional 
state theory, and then discuss a fleshed-out form of the view, in which happiness 
is understood as a kind of “psychic affirmation,” to illustrate some of the more 
important types of states that happiness can involve. The next chapter fills in vari­
ous gaps in the account, and argues that the psychological distinctions that con­
cern us cut across, and extend beyond, the traditional categories of emotions and 
moods. I sketch the elements of a fuller view that incorporates the new distinctions 
and show that the resulting account of happiness is coherent and well-motivated. 
Moreover, it points to important omissions in standard views of human affect, 
and so should interest emotion researchers and others on that basis alone.
A subsidiary goal of both chapters is to show that the popular “smiley-face” 
stereotype of happiness, which may seem particularly salient on an emotional 
state view, grossly distorts and oversimplifies the phenomenon: happiness has 
a much richer, deeper, more complex, and less obvious psychology than the 
common image suggests. Cheery feelings matter, and do not deserve the abuse 
so often heaped on them, but they are a relatively uninteresting part of the story. 
And much of the story, we will see, is likely to be surprisingly opaque to the 
individual whose happiness is in question. So elusive, indeed, is the psychology of


Emotional State 107
happiness that I will not even try to offer a precise characterization of it: the theory 
defended here will be filled in as carefully as I can manage, but a complete account 
of happiness will require further progress in our scientific understanding of the 
emotional realm. Certainly a reductive analysis in familiar folk psychological 
terms, of the sort traditionally favored by analytical philosophers, will be out of 
the question. Here is an example of what I mean. In “A Theory of Happiness,” 
Wayne Davis offers what he takes to be a hedonistic account, defining happiness 
as both believing and desiring the propositions one is thinking about.^ The 
“happiness function” is:
n
h b{Pdd{Pi), where Pj,. . .P„ is an enumeration of all thoughts A is 
i=\thinking.
and
A is happy at t iff ^ > 0
A is unhappy at t iff < 0
Meaning: “take every proposition A is thinking at the moment, multiply the 
degree to which it is believed by the degree to which it is desired, add up all 
the products, and the sum is A’s degree of happiness.”^ If the sum is positive, 
A is happy; if negative, A is unhappy. This is, in significant respects, admirably 
precise. But it is also the sort of old-fashioned conceptual analysis that rarely 
yields believable results. As well, the theory is in significant ways imprecise: what 
is meant, for instance, by ‘belief and ‘desire’? These terms cover a lot of ground, 
and some of the things within their province yield a much less plausible theory 
than others. And how are the beliefs and desires related? Is the idea that one 
believes, of the proposition one desires, that it obtains? Or that one desires, of the 
proposition one believes, that it obtain? Other readings are possible as well. At any 
rate, I will not so much as attempt this sort of formal precision in what follows.
My arguments will focus not on what it is to achieve happiness, but on the 
more fundamental question of what makes a state happiness-constituting: in virtue 
of what a state makes a constitutive difference in how happy or unhappy we are.'* 
This is the crucial issue: for we want to be as happy as we can be, consistendy with 
the other things that matter. The further question of whether we will actually be 
happy, period, is less pressing. It also raises difficulties of its own.
2. FROM PLEASURE TO HAPPINESS
Since the emotional state theory can be seen as an effort to remedy the defects 
of hedonism, it is worth recapping two of the arguments from Chapter 4. 
First, it is psycholo^cally superficial: it incorporates only the experiential aspect 
of our emotional conditions. Yet our emotional lives are extremely rich, and


do not reduce to their experiential surfaces. They involve unconscious processes 
of various sorts, and often have physiological components. Recall the paradigm 
cases from Chapter 3: it is simply not credible to regard them merely as so 
many experiential episodes. Nor is it plausible to claim that the states listed 
are happiness-constituting only qua pleasures. One is unhappy by virtue of 
being depressed, not by virtue of experiencing the unpleasantness of depression. 
Happiness has depth that the pleasure theory misses.
The second criticism of hedonism svas that it is too inclusive, counting many 
irrelevant pleasures: in its usual incarnations, all pleasures and displeasures are 
considered happiness-constituting. Yet many pleasures seem trivial or superficial, 
making no difference to how happy we are. Even intensely pleasant experiences 
can fail to impact our happiness: notoriously, sexual activity can leave us cold. 
Sometimes it just doesn’t move us. This is one of the hard lessons dealt 
to the unsophisticated libertine, or the troubled youth seeking to relieve his 
melancholy through meaningless sexual encounters. Consider also the pain of 
having one’s gouty toe stepped on. Most of us will find unhappiness in such 
an experience. It is hard not to let intense pain get to you. But someone of a 
stoic nature may be disciplined enough that such pains don’t get to her at all; 
she maintains her equanimity throughout. Intuitively, her happiness remains 
untouched.
108 Pan II: The Nature of Happiness
3. EMOTIONAL STATE THEORIES: THE DEFAULT VIEW
Happiness in intelligent people is the rarest thing I know.
Hemingway
The distinction between happiness-constituting affects and mere pleasures seems 
to concern whether a given affect involves one’s emotional condition. Certain 
affects, notably “mere” physical pains and pleasures, seem not to be particularly 
emotional, and need not make a difference in our emotional conditions: they 
don’t get to us. Whereas others, such as the paradigm emotions and especially 
moods, do seem to alter our emotional conditions while they last. I say “paradigm” 
emotions because the term ‘emotion’ ranges extremely widely, including states 
that seem not to be particularly emotional, or to involve our emotional conditions. 
For instance, you might be angry with a distant government for some policy 
you disapprove of, or afraid that this policy will have a bad outcome, yet never 
feel the least bit angry or afraid; your attitudes are purely intellectualized, and 
would at most implicate your emotional state were you to ruminate on the 
matter and work yourself up into a genuine state of anger or fear about it. 
Such notional “emotions” amount to litde more than beliefs, perhaps having no 
affective component at all, and are psychologically very different from paradigm


Emotional State 109
emotions of anger and fear. 5 Thus we are sometimes careful to note that, while 
we might be “angry” or “fear” something in some sense, we are not genuinely 
mad or afraid. It is plausible that states of the latter sort diminish one’s happiness 
thereby, whereas states of the more intellectualized sort do not. (If the reader’s 
intuitions differ, this will probably be due to conceiving of happiness along the 
lines of attitudinal hedonism, discussed in Chapter 4, or an a^regative form 
of life satisfaction.) To capture the distinction, we might refer to the paradigm 
emotions as “passions,” but this term may connote too much; I will just ^1 
them “emotions” or “emotions proper.”
Here is a simple version of the emotional state theory, what we might call the 
default emotional state theory of happiness. It maintains that happiness consists in 
a person’s overall emotional condition, which in turn consists in the aggregate 
of her moods and emotions. To be happy, on this view, is for one’s emotional 
condition to be, on the whole, positive. That is, the overall balance of one’s 
moods and emotions is positive rather than negative; positive emotions and 
moods outweigh the negative. As with a hedonistic account of happiness, the 
emotional state view allows happiness to be assessed over arbitrarily brief or long 
periods of time. As stated the theory is somewhat vague, but good enough to 
give us a starting point for further reflection. I will argue shortly for several 
modifications to this basic schema.
An even simpler form of the theory would count only moods, or only emotions. 
Without a special account of moods or emotions, however, such a move would 
be hard to sustain. If being in a depressed, irritable, or anxious mood makes a 
person less happy thereby, then presumably emotions of profound sadness or 
anger can as well, and vice versa.
The emotional state theory does not take happiness to be an emotion or 
mood. It is, rather, a condition consisting in (at least) the aggregate of a person’s 
emotions and moods, and this can be a complex matter. You can be cheerful and 
anxious at the same time, for instance. It might be stricdy more accurate, then, 
to call this an emotional condition” theory, but calling happiness an emotional 
condition makes it sound like a disease. I will speak interchangeably of a person’s 
emotional state and emotional condition.
It is plausible that some son of emotional state theory can account for the 
paradigm cases; this will become clearer in the discussion to follow. Note that 
the acute emotion or mood of “feeling happy” is just one of the happiness- 
constituting states. Its role in happiness is grotesquely exaggerated in the popular 
imagination, doubtless accounting for much of the scorn heaped on happiness 
by dysthymic philosophers and the like. Intuitively, most happy people don’t feel 
happy most of the time: they may be relatively tranquil, fulfilled, in good spirits, 
etc. They need not be brimming with giddy exhilaration. Indeed, a plausible form 
of the emotional state theory could well allow that some happy individuals might 
never feel happy: one can imagine an Archie Bunker-like kvetch—a New York 
deli owner, say—who is generally fulfilled and emotionally untroubled, as his


110 Pan II: The Nature of Happiness
favorite sport, complaining, doesn’t get him down. He may, despite appearances, 
be happy.
This sort of point comes through well in one of the better literary depictions 
of happiness, ''^ile Hemingway seems to have been no great fan of happiness 
as such, he arguably left us one of its more compelling illustrations. The Old 
Man and the Sea’s Santiago is not the imj^e of happiness in the “smiley-face” 
sense, which turns up only briefly if at all, notably at the beginning, where 
the reader learns that his eyes are “cheerful and undefeated.”® Yet he is a 
model of what the ancients called ataraxia—tranquility, imperturbability—and 
Hemingway’s exemplar, I suspect, of genuine happiness. Indeed, it is hard to 
avoid the thought that the author very much envied the Cuban fisherman, who 
appeared in some ways to be his opposite—unreflective, destitute, bereft of 
physical comforts, and anonymous but utterly contented and at home in his 
world, in contrast to Hemingway’s own uneasy wealth, fame, and intellectual 
achievements. (Within a decade of its publication, which quickly garnered a 
Pulitzer and a Nobel, Hemingway would take his own life. It may seem odd 
to call Santiago unreflective, since much of the book is taken up with his 
silent reflections, often perceptive and wise. But even the unreflective have an 
inner monologue, and all of us engage in some reflection; it is a matter of 
degree. “Do not think about sin, he thought. There are enough problems now 
without sin. Also I have no understanding of it. . . Do not think about sin. 
It is much too late for that and there are people who are paid to do it. Let 
them think about it.”^ This is not someone you’d expect to find in a Left 
Bank cafe clutching a well-worn copy of Being and Nothingness) Santiago’s 
happy disposition shows itself at many points, but I will note just one: despite 
his poverty, his rotten luck, and tremendous physical discomfort, his sleep 
throughout is plainly untroubled, characterized by pleasant dreams of watching 
lions on a beach and the like. The last we hear of him, “the old man was 
dreaming about the lions,” evidendy unperturbed, even unimpressed, by the 
long ordeal that had just culminated in losing a record catch to sharks.® Peaceful 
slumbers are an ancient sign of the tranquil mind, and the scene recalls Plato’s 
depiction of Socrates at the start of the Crito (see Chapter 1). Hemingway drives 
the point home with the jarring introduction of clueless tourists immediately 
before this. They see the tattered remains of Santiago’s marlin and take it for an 
impressive shark. Santiago’s accomplishment will never be known beyond the 
village.
The emotional state theory bears some resemblance to hedonism, but dif­
fers in at least two important respects. In one respect, it is more restrictive, 
excluding many “superficial” pleasures that fail to implicate our emotional 
conditions. In another respect, it is more expansive, incorporating our emo­
tional conditions in their entirety, including their unconscious and dispositional 
components. As well, it regards happiness as fundamentally a different sort of 
entity: not merely a sum of conscious episodes or events, but a psychological


Emotional State 111
condition. (See Chapter 4.) This point, somewhat cryptic here, will become 
clearer as we add further flesh to the version of the theory defended in this 
chapter.
So long as the reader grants the plausibility of some form of emotional state 
theory, the central aim of this chapter will have been met. But though it is 
possible for an emotional state theorist simply to identify happiness with the 
aggregate of an individual’s moods and/or emotions, I think there is a more 
helpful way to distinguish the relevant states. We will return to that question, 
and discuss other technical matters, in the next chapter. In what remains of this 
chapter, I want to go beyond the default view and develop the basic schema in 
more concrete terms, aiming to illustrate the potential richness and depth, and 
broad appeal, of an emotional state theory. This will also help the reader develop 
an intuitive feel for the account before plunging into the more difficult territory 
of the chapter to follow.
4. THE THREE FACES OF HAPPINESS
4.1. Introduction: happiness as psychic affirmation
To fill out the emotional state view more concretely, it will be helpful to 
start with a broad ideal that can help guide our reflections about the specifics. 
A natural proposal is to think of being happy as an individual’s responding 
favorably, in emotional terms, to her life—responding emotionally to her life as 
if things are generally going well for her. This usefully parallels the competing 
ideal of life satisfaction: more or less, the individual’s judging that her life is 
going well enough for her. That is, roughly, responding rationally to her life 
as if things are generally going well for her. We might say that life satisfaction 
chiefly concerns the endorsement of the intellect, whereas happiness concerns 
the endorsement of the emotional aspect of the self (the “psyche,” as I will 
sometimes put it, for reasons to be discussed in the next chapter).» Call this 
conditionaffirmation. In more pronounced forms, we might call it psychic 
flourishing.^'^
The question is what psychic affirmation amounts to. My goal here is to sketch 
a rough and informal outline of a fuller view, with no pretensions at completeness 
or exactitude. It will be enough if the reader comes away with some appreciation of 
the diversity and elusiveness of the states encompassed by happiness. Approaching 
the matter from a biological perspective, we can ask how it would make sense to 
design emotional creatures such as ourselves. What sorts of emotional responses 
would be required.^ I would conjecture that all emotional states instantiate 
one or more of three basic modes of affirmative or negative response. At 
the most basic level will be responses concerning the individual’s safety and 
security: for example, letting one’s defenses down, making oneself fiilly at


112 Part II: The Nature of Happiness
home in one’s life— being in a state of utter attunement with one’s life, we 
might say—as opposed to taking up a defensive stance. Next come responses 
relating to the individual’s commitment to or engagement with her situation and 
activities; is it worth investing much effort in them, or would it be wiser to 
withdraw or disengage from them? Finally, there will be more or less explicit 
endorsements signifying that one’s life is not just free of threat and worth pursuing 
enthusiastically, but positively good, containing things that are to be built upon, 
sustained, repeated, or sought in the future—as, for example, when one has just 
achieved a goal or received a great benefit. (Theories of emotion frequently take 
all affects to be of this sort, and accordingly one of my aims is to call attention to 
other kinds of affective response.) While the three modes of response (arguably) 
concern progressively less fondamental aspects of well-being, affects of each kind 
can occur to some extent independently of the others. One need not enjoy 
security, for instance, to experience something as a positive benefit; on the other 
hand, the heights of joy may be unreachable for the deeply anxious. We will see 
as well that some affects appear to instantiate more than one mode of response.
For each of the three modes of response we can identify a corresponding aspect 
or dimension of happiness. * ^ People have disagreed through the ages about the 
relative importance of these dimensions, so that for each we can identify one or 
more corresponding ideals that emphasize it. Since these ideals of living have 
probably arisen in every civilized age, it will be helpful to connect them with the 
familiar ancient Greek tradition, thus distinguishing Democritean, Aristotelian 
and Dionysian, and Stoic ideals of happiness. I will discuss them in reverse order, 
starting with the least fundamental, but most familiar:
1. Endorsement (Democritean)
2. Engagement (Aristotelian and Dionysian)
3. Attunement (Stoic)
Each mode of response encompasses negative as well as positive responses; 
it will be convenient (if inelegant) to refer to the negative counterparts as 
“disendorsement,” “disengagement,” and “disattunement.” I will not endorse 
a particular ideal of happiness, though each dimension is important. And there 
is clearly more than one way to be happy, as Mill observed in distinguishing 
two of our three dimensions, writing that “the main constituents of a satisfied 
life appear to be two, either of which by itself is often found sufficient for the 
purpose: tranquillity, and excitement. With much tranquillity, many find that 
they can be content with very little pleasure: with much excitement, many can 
reconcile themselves to a considerable quantity of pain.”*^ (Note also that these 
ideals can be driven by non-prudential considerations, such as beliefs about what 
matters for virtue.) But I will suggest that the standard contemporary view of 
happiness gets the relative priority of these dimensions pretty near backwards: 
the dimensions listed above appear in ascending order of importance, whereas 
we find the reverse ranking in the popular im^ination.


Emotional State 113
4.2. Endorsement
My body restore for me. i ^
My mind restore for me.
Happily I recover. . .
In beauty 1 walk.
It is finished in beauty.
The Night Chant (a Navajo healing 
ceremony for mental illness)'^
In the present era, the lion’s share of attention has gone to the endorsement 
aspect of happiness, typified by affects along tht joy-sadness axis, especially those 
of feeling happy or cheerful.*'* This is—or at least includes—the prototypically 
American version of happiness, perhaps because it suits the American emphasis 
on pursuing your dreams. Also, affects along this dimension are the hardest to 
miss, as we tend to wear them on our faces, in smiles, frowns, laughter, and the 
like. Even a child can grasp this sort of happiness. The historical literature, by 
contrast, tends not to emphasize such affects, as we saw in Mill’s omission of 
them in distinguishing the main varieties of happiness. Perhaps this is because 
such affects can be so hard to sustain: it is difficult to make yourselfhappy 
for any lengthy period of time, at least if you are not already that way by 
temperament. As with sadness, happy feelings tend quickly to fade. But even 
among the ancients this sort of ideal seems to have had its defenders, notably in 
the views of Democritus—“the laughing philosopher”—who apparently held 
our goal to be euthymia, roughly cheerfulness. We know little of Democritus’ 
views, and there is reason to believe that he viewed euthymia as more a matter 
of tranquility than smiley-face feelings. But he has been well-enough associated 
with ideals of cheerfulness that we might reasonably deem ideals of happiness 
that emphasize such feelings “Democritean.”
While it is easy to overstate the importance of joy-sadness affects for happiness, 
we should not understate it either; in particular, we should bear in mind that 
such affects can vary widely in centrality or depth: the profound joy that one’s 
children can bring must not be conflated with a high-fiver’s jubilation, or the 
vacant cheeriness of a shopping mall devotee who finds his life agreeable but has 
no occasion for real joy. Consider also the Stoic notion of chara, joy, among the 
“good feelings,” or the rapturous perception of the world’s beauty expressed by 
the Navajo chant. A shallow cheeriness has its merits, but if that’s the best that 
can be said for your emotional state then it is questionable whether we could 
sensibly deem you happy.
Other endorsement-type affects do exist, most important perhaps being 
irritability, which is most naturally contrasted with cheerfulness. The latter, 
however, appears to fall along the same axis as joy, both being variants of “feeling 
happy.” Irritability appears to fall on a different axis, perhaps one without a


114 Pan II: The Nature of Happiness
positive pole. (Since many emotion researchers regard positive and negative 
affects as independent rather than occupying opposite ends of common axes, this 
asymmetry need not be a problem.*^ But nothing important hangs on whether 
joy and sadness truly fall along a single axis or not.) Other affects, including 
fulfillment and anger, will be mentioned later. But states along or near the 
joy—sadness axis constitute the central case.
4.3. Engagement
I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily 
and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath 
and shave close, to drive life into a corner.
Thoreau, Walden
A closely related but importantly distinct dimension concerns the individual s 
engagement with her life: not listless and withdrawn, but energetic and engaged. 
For one can affirm one’s life, not just by giving it a “thumbs up, but by 
enthusiastically taking up what it has to offer. This can happen even when 
things are not going particularly well, for instance when struggling to accomplish 
a difficult goal. There are two ideals associated with engagement, the first of 
which centers on states of energy or vitality: the exuberance-depression axis.*^ A 
passionate and demanding orchestra conductor, for instance, might be exuberant, 
even happy, without being obviously cheerful or joyful. I do not know whether 
the Cleveland’s George Szell was like this, but he was evidendy quite passionate in 
living—in his cooking at home as well as in his work—perhaps embodying a kind 
of exuberance. The mere fact that he was a harsh taskmaster need not disqualify 
him from happiness. A lot depends on whether his temper often left him deeply 
unsettled—as seems to have been the case for the mercurial Toscanini—or 
whether its manifestations were typically superficial and transient, leaving his 
internal state largely undisturbed.
This exuberant form of happiness is typified in ideals of passionate living, 
notably in Nietzsche, Goethe, and countless other romantics and artists.I am 
not sure who among the major ancient philosophers endorsed such an ideal, 
so I will refer to the ideal as “Dionysian.” Proponents of the passionate life 
frequently claim to oppose happiness as a significant value, but I would suggest 
this owes to an overly narrow understanding of the phenomenon, conflating it 
with cheerfulness and quietude. Yet there is a real tension here: exuberance or 
passion often brings in its trail emotional disturbance of a distinctly negative 
sort, as Stoics, Epicureans, Buddhists, and other ancients were fond of pointing 
out. The passionate life will normally involve a fair dose of anger, frustration, 
and sorrow, and so this form of happiness can be hard to achieve without 
compromising other aspects of happiness. It can thus be a bad bet from the


Emotional State 115
perspective of the individual’s well-being. (Though it might be admirable, and 
thus worth seeking, all the same.) But one need not pursue the passionate life 
to the Nietzschean extreme: some forms of exuberant living are less risky than 
others, and many people lead lives of great vitality without plunging themselves 
into the depths. Exuberance need not entail epic struggles. (Think Whitman’s 
“barbaric yawp,” which was not intended to be the howl of a tormented artist.)
A quieter form of engagement than exuberance or vitality can arguably be 
found in Aristotle’s work, and more recently in the notion of “flow” propounded 
by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi.*® This is the state one assumes when fully engaged 
in an activity, typically a challenging activity performed well. In states of flow, 
individuals lose all sense of self-awareness, of the passage of time, and are not 
aware of feeling anything at all. It is nonetheless a highly pleasant state, and 
clearly a state in which the individual is happy. We might regard its opposite to 
be boredom. While the other states we have been discussing may seem clearly 
to involve a person’s psychic disposition or stance, flow may not seem like that. 
But it is: to be in a state of flow is to assume, emotionally and cognitively, 
a stance of interest and engagement—a kind of psychic coupling with the 
objects of one’s attention. Aristotle does not write explicitly of flow, but his 
treatment of the pleasures supervening on virtuous or excellent activity clearly 
resonates (as Csikszentmihalyi notes*^). Certainly, the happiness that attends 
Aristotelian well-being—virtuous activity—will include a strong component of 
flow. We might thus term the idea of happiness as engagement in the sense of 
flow the “Aristotelian” ideal. (To call it that is not to suggest that Aristotelian 
ethics centers on promoting flow; clearly it does not.^® The point concerns the 
psychological states that tend to be associated with Aristotelian ideals, even if 
only as a by-product of the virtuous activity that really matters.)
The significance of engagement becomes clearest in cases of depression, where 
the characteristic lethargy and lisdessness signals a broad psychic disengagement 
from one’s life. While sometimes disordered and always awful, this sort of 
withdrawal can sometimes be functional, facilitating major life changes by 
pulling us out of our existing routines and signaling that our present way of 
living may not be worth continuing.^ ^
4.4. Attiinement
Journal notes, August 8.
Sundown on the Pond. A gull is laughing from a perch on a post in the Pond. 
Now a skimmer glides by, plowing a tiny furrow through the shallows. No 
permanent mark. Nothing is permanent out here. Sand and water... no 
mark endures save of notion, of idea. . . Here the veil between us and the 
tmth of existence is very thin and, to my mind, can be pierced. These past 
few weeks, I have setded into mindless existence, with few thoughts and no 
dreams. My being is effordess, untroubled by pain, unstirred by joy. This


being is meditative, with no need of mantras or quiet rooms. Here on the 
seam between objective and subjective reality no special effort is required to 
contemplate the merge. When I perceive the gull and apply my perceptual 
sieves, it is accomplished.
Ron Haybron, Island'^'^
116 Part II: The Nature of Happiness
The third and perhaps most important dimension of happiness is best approached 
by reflecting on states that fall along on the tranquility-anxiety axis. This is not the 
occasion to plumb the nuances of tranquility, but we might think of tranquility 
as “settledness”: not merely peace of mind or lack of internal discord but a 
kind of inner surety or confidence, stability and balance, or imperturbability.^^ 
Whereas endorsement’s characteristic appearance is the smile, and engagement’s 
the jaunty gait, tranquility presents itself in the relaxed, easy posture. It is clearly a 
highly pleasant state, and not simply the absence of disturbance or other feeling. 
Nor does it rule out states of high arousal or exuberance; indeed, exuberance 
without any sort of tranquility is liable to be jittery and unstable. But tranquility 
seems crucial for being happy. Not long ago, during a somewhat stressful period 
preceding the birth of our twins, I noticed how happy my mood would become 
while bathing my three-year-old. Yet even during those moments I do not think 
/ was happy, for beneath the good cheer ran a distinct undercurrent of anxiety, 
and I never stopped feeling off balance, unsettled. Hemingway’s Santiago, by 
contrast, is an exemplar of tranquility. (Those of a Nietzschean bent take note: 
as Santiago makes clear, tranquility entails neither complacency nor passivity.)
So misleading is the conventional understanding of tranquility that it is 
useful to set that notion aside momentarily and consider the fundamental 
biological condition that it represents. When an organism is in familiar and 
safe circumstances, where it has mastery of its environment, it can let down its 
defenses—dialing down the cortisol, for instance—and confidently engage in 
whatever pursuits it wishes. It is this condition, in a person, we are concerned 
with. The Stoics might have said that the individual in that situation finds her 
life oikeion—familiar—to her; she is utterly at home in her life. In her element. 
Similarly, think of the state one assumes when relaxing with a still-close friend 
after a long separation, particularly if one normally has few close friends nearby. 
You feel completely at home with that person. ‘Tranquility’ seems too narrow a 
term for the condition of psychically being at home in one’s life; I will call it a 
state of attunement.^^ In this state a person relaxes and blossoms, living as seems 
natural to her, according to her internal priorities, and without inhibition. The 
opposite of attunement, disattunement, is not merely anxiety, but more broadly 
alienation-, your circumstances are in some sense alien to you—unfamiliar, 
imposing, threatening. Defenses go up: anxiety, stress, insecurity.
I will not try formally to define the notion of attunement here, but it appears 
to have three basic aspects: (1) inner calm or peace (“tranquility” in the colloquial


Emotional State 117
sense); (2) confidence or surety; and (3) openness or expansiveness of mood or 
spirit, or a sense of freedom (feeling “carefree” being one form of this). To 
fully capture the notion of being at home in one’s life, perhaps we should also 
add a sense of conrinuity or fit between self and world—a bit perhaps like the 
“oceanic feeling” Freud spoke of ‘Confidence’ refers to an internal emotional or 
psychic condition, and bears only a loose relation to one’s opinion of oneself. 
The phenomenon of what we might call “somatic confidence”—feeling wholly 
at home in one’s body—is illustrative. Those who have felt the extremes of 
somatic confidence know how vastly better it is to have it than not, and how 
much happier one seems to be when in it than not: think, at the negative pole, 
of Nixonian awkwardness (the former president seemed to personify a Cartesian 
dualism of body and mind gone badly askew); at the positive end, the athletic 
grace of a ballet dancer. This is an important part of what is meant here by 
‘confidence.’ (Is somatic confidence any part of one’s emotional condition? I 
submit that it is: when enjoying such a state one is not edgy or nervous; one’s 
emotional condition is more favorable, and one is happier. You could have stood 
behind Nixon while he thrust his appendages skyward to signal “victory” and 
known immediately that you were not observing an entirely happy man.)
The term ‘attunement’ is not ideal; it connotes a state of harmonious 
coexistence with, or rapt attention to, one’s environment. Yet a logger could 
enjoy this condition whilst clear-cutting the last stand of ancient redwoods; and 
while someone in a state of “attunement” with her life is indeed likely to have a 
healthy outward focus, being receptive to her surroundings, being “attuned” to 
things in the environment is neither central nor essential to it. The attunement 
in question is broadly emotional, not perceptual.
Among the ancients, the ideal of happiness as attunement seems most naturally 
to be associated with the Stoics, given the apparent affinity between the present 
conception of attunement and the Stoics’ ‘oikeion,’ and more broadly their focus 
on living according to nature and not being at odds with one’s life as it is. 
To call happiness as attunement a “Stoic” ideal might sow confusion given 
the common view of the Stoics as joyless ascetics who regarded emotions as a 
pestilence rather than a central aspect of well-being. While the Epicureans are 
better known for placing a kind of attunement at the center of the good life, the 
Stoic resonances seem to me sufficiently compelling that I will call this ideal of 
happiness “Stoic.”
Without going to the Stoic extreme, I would suggest that attunement does 
indeed form the core of happiness, being not ancillary but quite central to 
it. Anxiety, stress, insecurity, and related states are not merely unpleasant in 
themselves; they rob us of much of our capacity for the other dimensions of 
happiness. Some measure of cheerfulness you might get while suffering from 
these forms of psychic disattunement, but exuberance, flow, and joy will be hard 
to come by. Intuitively, a troubled, anxious, tense, or stressed our person—more 
broadly, someone who does not seem psychically to be at home in his life—does


118 Pan II: The Nature of Happiness
not seem to be happy, however cheerful he might be. This point will prove 
significant later.
4.5. Attunement, part two: stress and compression
I distmst the perpetually busy; always have. The frenetic ones spinning in 
tight little circles like poisoned rats. The slower ones, grinding away their 
fourscore and ten in righteousness and pain. They are the soul-eaters.
Mark Slouka, “Quitting the Paint Factory”
It is easy to overlook the importance of the attunement dimension of happiness 
for human well-being, in great part because it does not command our attention 
like the others do. (1 will suggest in Chapter 10 that it may be less conspicuous 
than other affective states by design.) Consider for example the phenomenon of 
stress, in the sense of being stressed (this term is v^ue, but nowadays we all know 
it well enough that it needs no introduction). It is important to see how deeply 
anathema this state is to well-being, for it is said to be pervasive in the present 
culture, yet seems nonetheless not to be taken very seriously. A major reason for 
this is that it is not usually all that unpleasant—not agonizing like back pain, 
chemotherapy, or depression can be, and not something we must urgently labor 
to relieve. It can seem more a nuisance than a great problem. The appearance 
is misleading, for the trouble with stress lies not mainly in the suffering it 
immediately involves but in its corrosive impact on the person: it compresses and 
flattens the spirit and smothers the individual s capacity for pleasure. Stressed 
individuals get less out of life, for they cannot as easily enjoy, or even notice, what 
life offers them. The joy of living, the manifold small pleasures that leaven our 
days—whose importance is readily dismissed, but is never lost on those peering 
into the grave—are substantially foreclosed when we are stressed. ^XTiat remains 
is usually quite bearable, but a lot less worth having.
What of this “flattening of the spirit”? What is meant by it and why does it 
matter? The phenomenon in question, relating primarily to the expansiveness 
aspect of attunement, might be termed affective, psychic, or spiritual com­
pression. (Though talk of the spirit or soul bears unfortunate connotations of 
cheap New A%e. sentimentality, 1 use these terms in a common secular and 
naturalistic sense. I mean them to suggest something psychologic^ly deep, 
intimate, and important to us.) The word may be new but the basic notion, 
first broached in Chapter 1, should be familiar to any contemporary, and 
arguably appears in various forms in the works of many writers, notably Mill 
and Nietzsche. It is easier illustrated than defined: e.g., someone leading a 
harried life—caught up in the “rat race,” as we say—may find himself feeling 
pressed-upon and confined, like a caged animal, emotionally deflated, small, ant­
like—“pinched and hidebound,” as Mill memorably put it. (Mill actually used


Emotional State 119
‘compression’ to describe the process of making a person like that: e.g., the 
public’s approved “ideal of character is to be without any marked character; to 
maim by compression, like a Chinese lady’s foot, every part of human nature 
which stands out prominently.”)^^ Xhg uncompressed person, by contrast, will 
feel free, expansive, spirimally enlarged. This is not mere phenomenology: it 
is how these individuals will seem to perceptive observers as well. To the 
uncompressed person, her psychically compressed counterparts will seem like 
“little people,” worker bees or ants rather than full-sized human beings—to the 
ancient Greeks, perhaps, the mikropsuchoi (literally, “small-souled”).^® Whereas 
the uncompressed person is liable to strike others as a “free spirit.” The con­
trast might be seen in comparing our stereotype of, say, an English aristocrat 
with that of a flamboyant Caribbean islander. Or consider the sharp differences 
between John Brown, Queen Victoria’s uninhibited Scottish servant—or for 
that matter Billy Connolly, the man who played him in John Madden’s film 
Mrs. Brown—and more typical members of a royal court. Uncompression is 
not exuberance: quieter forms of uncompression exist as well; there is no small­
ness or compression of spirit in Hemingway’s Santiago, or the Dalai Lama. 
And these are not mere matters of temperament: all of us have experiences 
of greater and less compression in our lives. You might experience affective 
expansion when thoroughly engaged in your favorite activity, particularly if 
it involves physical virtuosity. Surfing does it for some, sculpture for others, 
trading commodities for still others.
To get a better fix on the idea, it may be useful to indulge in a bit of 
speculation about how evolutionary processes could favor tendencies toward 
compression in certain circumstances. (It matters little whether the following 
story is true: the point is to illustrate what compression involves.) Imagine the 
predicament of an individual who is in a threatened subordinate position—e.g., 
is under the watchful eye of a hostile and belligerent dominant figure. One 
natural response to this kind of situation would be to avoid trouble by keep­
ing a low profile and making oneself as invisible as possible. Hunker down. 
This is a reactive stance in which one’s behavior is driven not internally but 
by the agendas of others: go with the flow, be agreeable, and don’t make 
waves. Y(^at would the emotional aspect of such a strategy be like? We might 
expect individuals in such a position to be relatively introverted rather than 
extroverted, to be less likely to be in what we call an expansive mood, to 
be relatively anxious or prone to anxiety, to be tentative rather than confid­
ent, to feel confined or trapped—not liberated—and perhaps to be somewhat 
flat emotionally. Such individuals might also tend to be relatively petty and 
selfish—too focused on their own precarious status to care much about others. 
These are all, I think, among the hallmarks of compression. And we should not 
be surprised if someone who exhibits these characteristics experiences a certain 
phenomenology: feeling small, or small-spirited. This is the core phenomenology 
of compression.


Compression appears to be a response to oppressive circumstances, such as 
these, in which one’s behavior can be neither natural nor free. There appear to 
be at least two basic sources of compression, each yielding a different form of the 
phenomenon (which is not to say they cannot combine). First is imposition or 
repression: that is, being in circumstances in which one’s functioning is dictated 
by forces other than one’s own nature. Social pressures demanding conformity are 
an obvious case here (it is ironic, but also fitting, that Victoria s closest confidant 
should have been a man who personified opposition to the buttoned-down ethos 
that bore her name).^^ But overscheduled living or struggling just to survive can 
have the same effect. Second is threat, which exerts pressure in a different way: not 
exacdy dictating what one does, but requiring one to assume a reactive and wary 
stance, anxious and vigilant. In fact all forms of compression seem fundamentally 
to involve a reactive stance: one’s functioning reflects external demands too much, 
and one’s own nature too litde. Little wonder that a form of this notion should 
make its way into Mill’s wonderful manifesto on behalf of individuality. Compres­
sion is effectively the sleep of individuality. I would suggest that what makes com­
pression so bad is not just that it is not a very pleasant way to be; but that it involves 
the hindrance of self-expression or self-fulfillment. This intuitively seems like a 
bad thing, and we will see why that should be so in Chapter 9: well-being consists 
largely in self-fulfillment. Compression does not seem compatible with that.
Returning to the question of stress, we can see that stressful living often 
involves both forms of compression: the imposition of having too much to do 
in too little time, and the constant threat of failing to get things well enough 
done. Living under a constant bombardment of “insane demands,” as Ginsburg 
put it,^® and being under continual threat of failure to meet them, tends not to 
enlarge the soul. Still less if success or failure is judged, not by oneself, but—as 
often happens in the more anonymous and competitive forms of society—by 
others whom one may not like or even know.
Of course it would be desirable to define compression in more exact terms; I 
have been able to do litde more than gesture at the phenomenon here. But the 
sheer difficulty of doing so, or even of pointing toward it with any discernment, is 
revealing in itself, and rather congenid to the purposes of this book. It illustrates 
how easily overlooked even central aspects of psychological well-being can be. 
Probably few people under high levels of compression have had much experience 
of radic^ly uncompressed living, save in early childhood, and probably few have 
much notion of the difference, or perhaps even that there is anything missing in 
the reduced condition. Compression seems easy to live with, however undesirable 
it may be.
120 Pan II; The Nature of Happiness
4.6. Summary
Summing up: we have identified three broad dimensions of happiness, each 
representing a different mode of emotional response to one s life, and each


Emotional State 121
tending to be favored over the others in various ideals of living. The dimensions, 
and their chief constituents, are (now in descending order of importance for 
happiness, though not within each dimension):
1. Attunement
a. Peace  of mind vs. anxiety.
b. Confidence vs. insecurity.
c. Uncompression vs. compression.
2. Engagement
a. Exuberance or vitality vs. lisdessness.
b. Flow vs. boredom or ennui.
3. Endorsement
a. Joy vs. sadness.
b. Cheerfulness vs. irritability.
The prominence of attunement reflects what we may think of as the stages of 
flourishing for a creature: the first priority is to establish conditions of safety 
and security, where the basic needs for functioning are firmly established so 
that it can make itself at home and blossom—like placing a sapling in fertile 
soil. The organism is in its element; it assumes a stance of attunement. This 
established, a stance of engagement will tend naturally to follow, as the creature 
exploits the situation in the energetic pursuit of its goals. Last comes the stance of 
endorsement, as the organism succeeds in meeting its goals. Note that the ranking 
concerns the relative roles of these states in happiness; you could accept it while 
ranking them diflPerently in terms of value or choiceworthiness. A Nietzschean, 
for instance, might value states of vitality or exuberance over peace of mind, even 
if this means being less happy.
Naturally, this schema, if illustrative, is a bit oversimplified. For example, I 
couched compression as a failure of attunement, a kind of psychic disattunement 
or alienation—it certainly is not a way of being psychically at home in one’s 
life—but it appears to involve the engagement dimension of happiness as well, 
since the reactive stance characteristic of compression tends not to combine 
well with exuberance. And states of flow seem to involve a lessening of com­
pression. The example illustrates the interdependence of the three modes of 
response: affective states will often if not usually involve more than one. This 
makes sense since a given type of situation may call for a multifaceted response, 
so that affect types need not conform strictly to the three-mode schema. I will 
mention a few other examples to illustrate, and to show how some imponant 
states fit in the present account of happiness.
Fear is typically thought to involve withdrawal (the engagement dimension), 
a defensive disturbance akin to anxiety (the attunement dimension), and a


122 Part II: The Nature of Happiness
negative appraisal of the object (the endorsement dimension).Anger presents 
an interesting case: it at least involves a negative appraisal, and possibly some 
defensive disturbance, but it also seems to involve approach tendencies charac­
teristic of engagement. It thus appears, in that respect, to be a positive affective 
state, whilst being negative in others. Though contrary to initial appearances, 
this seems rather plausible: anger counts against happiness in the obvious ways, 
but it can also count toward happiness to some extent, as might be imagined 
in the case of a warrior resolutely pursuing a vendetta against a hated enemy, 
drawing strength from his anger. There can be an aspect of dark flourishing in 
such a case, for the individual is fully and energetically engaged in the business of 
living. But we would hesitate to describe such a person as happy on the whole, 
since there remains a clear sense in which the anger is primarily a negative state.
On the positive side, there is the interesting question of what to make 
of emotional fulfillment, or feeling fulfilled. This seems a crucial aspect of 
happiness when we picture its prototypical forms, and we are unlikely to 
regard as happy someone whose life is unfulfilling. The question merits a fuller 
treatment than it will get here, but I would venture that fulfillment is chiefly 
a mixture of attunement and joy (usually muted but deeply felt)—a state that 
paradigmatically follows on the fulfillment of the heart’s desires. We can think 
of this as taking two forms. At the heights we have the fulfillment of repose, as 
happens when reflecting on one’s great fortune. The more pedestrian variety, the 
fulfillment of engagement, arises when engaged in activities that well suit our 
natures. States of flow may sometimes be like this, or perhaps the fulfillment 
follows them.
It must be emphasized that the preceding taxonomy is intended to be rough 
and informal, meant to serve as a plausible starting point for further reflection 
and investigation. The core points, regarding the richness and demandingness 
of happiness, and the basic character of some of its more important states, 
could survive even with substantial adjustments to the picture. A rigorous 
development of the account would need to be put in the context of a more 
or less complete theory of affect—a project well beyond the scope of this 
book, and possibly premature given the state of scientific knowledge in this 
realm. Much greater attention must also be given to each of the states involved 
in happiness, only some of which have been touched on here. Were there a 
reasonably mature literature on the subject, we would find numerous journal 
articles dedicated to each of the many states involved here—significant bodies 
of work on, for example, the nature and significance for happiness of tran­
quility, or confidence, or vitality, or flow.^o For now, a rough sketch will have 
to do.
In the next chapter we will develop the present version of the emotional state 
theory in greater detail. First, however, I want to note some advantages of an 
emotional state approach, illustrating how it can diminish common doubts about 
the significance of happiness.


Emotional State 123
5. IS HAPPINESS IMMUTABLE?
If someone still wishes to maintain that happiness is not important, it is hard 
to know what to say. Neither Nietzsche nor the Stoics, who seem to define the 
limits of sane opinion in such matters, went that far. It would appear to be a 
bitter, not to say monstrous, view of human life that denies significance across 
the board to such things as imperturbability, peace of mind, vitality of spirit, 
fulfillment, inner surety and expansiveness of soul. If there are those who want 
to embrace such an ethic, they are welcome to it.
The more interesting questions concern how important happiness is, and it 
is true that happiness is not the only thing that matters in life, or even for 
well-being. Moreover, it is clearly overvalued by many—those who are all too 
eager to trade their integrity for the promise of happiness, or who, thinking 
themselves entitled to be happy, do terrible things to their families, co-workers, 
or strangers in the name of an imaginary birthright. Others shoot themselves in 
the foot by valuing happiness so much they forget to put much value on anything 
else, leaving themselves with no real source of happiness. We should grant that 
happiness is not as important as some people think it is, and that it ranks firmly 
beneath virtue in a good life: to sacrifice the demands of good character in the 
name of personal happiness—or, I would add, personal welfare—can never be 
justified. We must, above all, act decently, if not well. Or so, at any rate, I 
am prepared to grant. None of this is incompatible in the least with the aims 
of this book. Happiness is a matter of central importance for a good life, and 
an important object of practical concern. To dismiss happiness as a lightweight 
matter of little import is most likely to be working with a lightweight conception 
of happiness.
Many other interesting doubts have been raised either about the importance 
of happiness or about whether we should pursue it. Here I will mention only 
certain worries about the extent to which our emotional conditions really track 
well-being. The aim will be not to rebut them fully, but to gesture at the resources 
an emotional state theory of happiness can bring to bear in addressing them. A 
familiar concern to those who have followed the empirical literature concerns 
adaptation and the idea that people have happiness “set points” toward which 
their happiness naturally tends to gravitate.These set points are said to be 
substantially heritable, perhaps as much as .80, though .50 is a more widely 
accepted figure. Recent events, even quite major ones, can move people up or 
down for a brief period, maybe a few months, but usually they will return to 
their set point—no more or less happy or unhappy than before. In one of 
the best recent philosophical treatments of happiness, Elijah Millgram pressed 
a version of this worry, arguing essentially that happiness functions to track 
not well-being, but changes in well-being. (Peter Railton has been developing


124 Part II: The Nature of Happiness
a version of this idea, suggesting a “delta meter” model of happiness.^^) The 
issues are too complex to address here fully, but it bears noting that most 
researchers now seem to believe that past claims about the relative immutability 
of happiness were often overstated.^^ Here I want to note a few ways in 
which an emotional state view of happiness may be less susceptible to such 
objections.
One version of the adaptation worry arises in political thought, where 
happiness is frequendy dismissed for being too subject to adaptation, raising 
the specter of happy slaves and the like.^"* Policymakers should thus focus their 
attention on other matters, such as the distribution of resources or capabilities. 
An emotional state view of happiness seems less vulnerable on this count 
than other theories. For while it is easy to imagine people becoming resigned 
to oppressive circumstances, even registering satisfaction with their lives or 
showing the world a happy face, it is not so easy to imagine the enslaved, the 
solitary homeless, and the browbeaten sweatshop laborer leading emotionally 
fulfilling lives. When reading Martha Nussbaum’s admirable depictions of 
struggling Indian women, ‘psychic flourishing’ is not the first term that comes 
to mind.^5
Second, we should question the standard rationale for expecting strong forms 
of adaptation to occur—that it usually doesn’t make sense evolutionarily or 
otherwise to feel happy or sad forever after an event, because we need to 
get on with our lives and deal with them as they now are. Emotions need 
to facilitate a response to the change and then get out of the way. There is 
something to this thought, but notice that it chiefly applies to endorsement-type 
states, which are neither the whole nor even the most important aspect of 
happiness. If relationships and work and leisure activities improve markedly, 
and remain so, then why should you gradually settle back to a “set point” level 
of engagement—ceasing to experience as much flow, and feeling less energetic 
and alive? Consider, particularly, states of anxiety or stress: if you are living 
under threat, and things stay that way for a long time, it makes little sense 
to let your defenses down and cease responding as if you are under threat. So 
long as they are out to get you, you had best stay prepared; so long as they 
are not, you should relax and stop toasting your brain and body with stress 
hormones. The point is not to deny that adaptation occurs with such states. But 
there is no reason to expect the strong sort of adaptation in such states that we 
seem to see with feelings of happiness and sadness. It is important to note as 
well that the empirical research mainly focuses on feelings like these—in the 
case of self-reported “happiness,” indirectly, given the likelihood that people 
tend to focus inordinately on such feelings when making such reports—or on 
other measures, like life satisfaction reports, that may also be especially prone 
to adaptation.(A further limitation of most research, particularly regarding 
the heritability of happiness, is the homogeneity of the populations studied. 
To an Amish farmer or San hunter, or the fishermen on the island mentioned


Emotional State 125
in Chapter 1, the affluent Westerners who mostly get studied may seem to 
be leading pretty near identical ways of life. If all your subjects live in similar 
environments, then of course the role of environment in determining happiness 
is going to seem limited. It is as if one were to run a series of studies on 
zoo bears and circus bears, find not much difference in well-being between the 
groups, and conclude that it doesn’t matter very much what environment you 
put bears in.)
Third, our emotional conditions plausibly tend to be keyed to the general 
conditions of our lives, not the details.^^ And once our basic needs for health 
and security are met, they seem to depend chiefly on how we live. Over the long 
haul, what we have and what happens to us—the sorts of objective variables 
that tend to get studied—seem to be secondary, typically of little more than 
transient concern (this is the wisdom embodied in the adaptation literature). 
If so, then we might expect happiness to seem immutable even if is not: it 
is hard to change the basics of how we live, at least at the level of individual 
decision. Consider the sorts of goods that tend to be cited as the main positive 
sources of happiness: notably, active social engagement, and meaningful activities 
that are well-matched to your abilities.^® Such things are not easily changed. 
If you’re lonely, harried, and bored to tears by your work now, you stand a 
good chance of being lonely, harried, and bored for a long time. And unless 
you’ve got the nerve and the ability to make some fundamental changes in 
how you live, and the wisdom to do it well, there may not be much you 
can do about it. The fact that your big paycheck, your designer home, your 
aromatherapy sessions, your personal coach, and your washboard abs have done 
nothing to make you happier scarcely shows that you’ve got a brain defect, or 
that unhappiness is written into your genes. Perhaps these aren’t the things you 
need for a good life.
The pursuit of happiness is not easy. Given that the basic conditions of our 
lives, and the way we live, are so heavily dependent on our social environment, 
we may want to look more closely at the societal dimensions of the question. (If 
this isn’t clear yet, it should become so in Part IV.) Even if we are suspicious of 
using policy instruments to promote happiness, we might at least consider the 
limits of individual effort, and the importance of context, in shaping how happy 
we are. Take, for example, recent initiatives to develop and teach methods by 
which people can make themselves happier. Such eflforts can produce very real 
benefits, and in fact many of the ancients were in a version of same business. 
While there are legitimate worries about such techniques sometimes reducing to 
cheap spiritual analgesics, I see no reason why this cannot be avoided.'*® A more 
interesting question, it seems to me, is how far individual efforts like this are 
likely to improve human well-being on a broad scale. If the problem lies chiefly 
in the way you live, and this in turn depends heavily on the kind of society you 
inhabit, then positive thinking techniques and the like are only going to get you 
so far.^*


126
The difficulty of pursuing happiness is no reason to think happiness a mainly 
biological or temperamental affair, unchangeable and unconnected with the 
conditions of our lives. Consider the way that depression has skyrocketed in 
recent decades. How should we explain this trend? It could be due to some 
environmental contaminant burning up our neurotransmitters. Or perhaps there 
is something wrong with the way many of us are living.
Part II: The Nature of Happiness
