WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
70
based on utility or on resources turn out to be insensitive to contextual
variation, to the way circumstances shape preferences and the abilityof
individuals to convert resources into meaningful human activity. Only
a broad concern for functioning and capability can do justice to the
complex interrelationships between human strivinganditsmaterialand
social context.
IV . CENTRAL HUMAN CAPABILITIES
The most interesting worries about universals thus lead us to prefer
universals of a particular type. I shall now argue that a reasonable
answer to all these concerns, capable of giving good guidance to gov-
ernments and international agencies, is found in a version of thecapa-
bilities approach – an approach to quality of life assessment pioneered
within economics by Amartya Sen,
65 and by now highly inﬂuential
through theHuman Development Reports of the United Nations De-
velopment Programme (UNDP).66 My own version of this approach
(which began independently of Sen’s work through thinking about Ar-
istotle’s ideas of human functioning and Marx’s use of them)
67 is in
several ways different from Sen’s, both in its emphasis on the philo-
sophical underpinnings of the approach and in its readiness to take a
stand on what the central capabilities are.
68 Sen has focused on the role
of capabilities in demarcating the space within which quality of life
assessments are made; I use the idea in a more exigent way, as a foun-
dation for basic political principles that should underwrite constitu-
65 The initial statement is in Sen, ‘‘Equality of What?’’ in S. McMurrin, ed., Tanner
Lectures on Human Values 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980), re-
printed in Sen, Choice, Welfare, and Measurement(Oxford and Cambridge, MA: Basil
Blackwell and MIT Press, 1982), hereinafter CWM; see also his various essays in
Resources, Values, and Development (Oxford and Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell
and MIT Press, 1984), hereinafter RVD; Commodities and Capabilities (Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1985); Well-Being, Agency, and Freedom: The Dewey Lectures 1984,
The Journal of Philosophy 82 (1985); ‘‘Capability and Well-Being,’’ in QL, 30–53;
‘‘Gender Inequality and Theories of Justice,’’ in WCD, 153–98;Inequality Reexamined
(Oxford and Cambridge, MA: Clarendon Press and Harvard University Press, 1992).
66 Human Development Reports: 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 (New York: United
Nations Development Programme).
67 See NFC, HN.
68 For a discussion of differences between our approaches, see David Crocker, ‘‘Function-
ing and Capability: The Foundations of Sen’s and Nussbaum’s Development Ethic, Part
I,’’ Political Theory 20 (1992), 584–612, and ‘‘. . . Part II,’’ in WCD, 153–98.

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
71
tional guarantees. I shall not comment on those differences further
here, but simply lay out the approach as I would currently defend it.
Like any universal approach, it is only valuable if developed in a rele-
vant way: so we need to worry not just about the structure of the
approach, but also about how to ﬂesh out its content in a way that
focuses appropriately on women’s lives. Otherwise promising ap-
proaches have frequently gone wrong by ignoring the problemswomen
actually face. But the capabilities approach directs us to examine real
lives in their material and social settings; there is thus reason for hope
that it may overcome this difﬁculty.
The central question asked by the capabilities approach is not,
‘‘How satisﬁed is Vasanti?’’ or even ‘‘How much in the way of re-
sources is she able to command?’’ It is, instead, ‘‘What is Vasanti ac-
tually able to do and to be?’’ Taking a stand for political purposes on
a working list of functions that would appear to be of central impor-
tance in human life, we ask: Is the person capable of this, or not? We
ask not only about the person’s satisfaction with what she does, but
about what she does, and what she is in a position to do (what her
opportunities and liberties are). And we ask not just about the re-
sources that are sitting around, but about how those do or do not go
to work, enabling Vasanti to function in a fully human way.
Having discovered some answers to these questions, we now put the
approach to work in two closely related ways. First, it is in terms of
these capabilities to function in certain core areas that we would mea-
sure Vasanti’s quality of life, comparing her quality of life to that of
others. When we aggregate the data from different lives to produce
accounts of regional, class, and national differences in quality of life, it
is always in the space of the central capabilities that we make those
comparisons, deﬁning the least well-off and the adequately well-off in
this way. Second, we then argue that in certain core areas of human
functioning a necessary condition of justice for a public political ar-
rangement is that it deliver to citizens a certain basic level of capability.
If people are systematically falling below the threshold in any of these
core areas, this should be seen as a situation both unjust and tragic, in
need of urgent attention – even if in other respects things are going
well.
The intuitive idea behind the approach is twofold: ﬁrst, that certain
functions are particularly central in human life, in the sense that their

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
72
presence or absence is typically understood to be a markofthepresence
or absence of human life;69 and second – this is what Marx found in
Aristotle – that there is something that it is to do these functions in a
truly human way, not a merely animal way. We judge, frequently
enough, that a life has been so impoverished that it is not worthy of
the dignity of the human being, that it is a life in which one goes on
living, but more or less like an animal, unable to develop and exercise
one’s human powers. In Marx’s example, a starving person doesn’t use
food in a fully human way – by which I think he means a way infused
by practical reasoning and sociability. He or she just grabs at the food
in order to survive, and the many social and rational ingredients of
human feeding can’t make their appearance. Similarly, he argues that
the senses of a human being can operate at a merely animal level – if
they are not cultivated by appropriate education, by leisure for play
and self-expression, by valuable associations with others; and we
should add to the list some items that Marx probably would not en-
dorse, such as expressive and associational liberty, and the freedom of
worship. The core idea is that of the human being as a digniﬁed free
being who shapes his or her own life in cooperation and reciprocity
with others, rather than being passively shaped or pushed around by
the world in the manner of a ‘‘ﬂock’’ or ‘‘herd’’ animal.
70 A life that is
really human is one that is shaped throughout by these human powers
of practical reason and sociability.
This idea of human dignity has broad cross-cultural resonance and
intuitive power. We can think of it as the idea that lies at the heart of
tragic artworks, in whatever culture. Think of a tragic character, as-
sailed by fortune. We react to the spectacle of humanity so assailed in
a way very different from the way we react to a storm blowing grains
69 For further development of this idea, see HN. For the way in which the capabilities
and functionings are individuated, in accordance with an account of distinct spheres of
human experience and choice, see NRV.
70 Compare Amartya Sen, ‘‘Freedoms and Needs,’’ The New Republic, January 10/17,
1994, p. 38: ‘‘The importance of political rights for the understanding of economic
needs turns ultimately on seeing human beings as people with rights to exercise, not as
parts of a ‘stock’ or a ‘population’ that passively exists and must be looked after.’’ An
excellent treatment of Marx’s thought on this issue, with implications for contempo-
rary debates, is in Daniel Brudney, ‘‘Community and Completion,’’ in Reclaiming the
History of Ethics: Essays for John Rawls (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1997), 388–415, although Brudney defends the Marxian view as the basis for a form
of comprehensive, rather than political, liberalism.

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
73
of sand in the wind. For we see a human being as having worth as an
end, a kind of awe-inspiring something that makes it horrible to see
this person beaten down by the currents of chance – and wonderful, at
the same time, to witness the way in which chance has not completely
eclipsed the humanity of the person.
71 As Aristotle puts it, ‘‘the noble
shines through.’’ Such responses provide us with strong incentives for
protecting that in persons that ﬁlls us with awe. We see the person as
having activity, goals, and projects – as somehow awe-inspiringly
above the mechanical workings of nature, and yet in need of support
for the fulﬁllment of many central projects.
72 This idea has manyforms,
some religious and some secular. Insofar as we are able to respond to
tragic tales from other cultures, we show that this idea of human worth
and agency crosses cultural boundaries.
At one extreme, we may judge that the absence of capability for a
central function is so acute that the person is not really a human being
at all, or any longer – as in the case of certain very severe forms of
mental disability, or senile dementia. But I am less interested in that
boundary (important though it is for medical ethics) than in a higher
threshold, the level at which a person’s capability becomes what Marx
called ‘‘truly human,’’ that is,worthy of a human being. Note that this
idea contains, thus, a reference to an idea of human worth or dignity.
Marx was departing from Kant in some importantrespects,bystressing
(along with Aristotle) that the major powers of a human being need
material support and cannot be what they are without it. But he also
learned from Kant, and his way of expressing his Aristotelian heritage
is distinctively shaped by the Kantian notion of the inviolability and
the dignity of the person.
Notice that the approach makes each person a bearer of value, and
an end. Marx, like his bourgeois forebears, holds that it is profoundly
wrong to subordinate the ends of some individuals to those of others.
That is at the core of what exploitation is, to treat a person as a mere
object for the use of others. Thus it will be just as repugnant to this
71 See Seneca, Moral Epistle 41, comparing the dignity of such a person to the awe-
inspiring sublimity of nature. This passage very likely inﬂuenced Kant’s famous conclu-
sion to the Critique of Practical Reason.
72 For elaboration of this part of the idea, see my ‘‘Victims and Agents,’’ The Boston
Review 23 (1998), 21–24, and ‘‘Political Animals: Luck, Love, and Dignity,’’ Metaphi-
losophy 29 (1998), 273–87.

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
74
Marxian approach as to a bourgeois philosophy to foster a good for
society considered as an organic whole, where this does not involve the
fostering of the good of persons taken one by one. What this approach
is after is a society in which persons are treated as each worthy of
regard, and in which each has been put in a position to live really
humanly. (That is where the idea of a threshold comes in: we say that
beneath a certain level of capability, in each area, a person has notbeen
enabled to live in a truly human way.) We may thus rephrase our
principle of each person as end , articulating it as aprinciple of each
person’s capability : the capabilities sought are sought for each and
every person, not, in the ﬁrst instance, for groups or families or states
or other corporate bodies. Such bodies may be extremely important in
promoting human capabilities, and in this way they may deservedly
gain our support: but it is because of what they do for people that they
are so worthy, and the ultimate political goal is always the promotion
of the capabilities ofeach person.
I believe that we can arrive at an enumeration of central elements of
truly human functioning that can command a broad cross-culturalcon-
sensus. (One way of seeing this is to think about the ways in which
tragic plots cross cultural boundaries: certain deprivations are under-
stood to be terrible, despite differences in metaphysical understandings
of the world.) Although this list of central capabilities is somewhat
different in both structure and substance from Rawls’s list of primary
goods, it is offered in a similar political-liberal spirit: as a list that can
be endorsed for political purposes, as the moral basis of central consti-
tutional guarantees, by people who otherwise have very different views
of what a complete good life for a human being would be. (In part, as
we shall see, this is because the list is a list of capabilities or opportu-
nities for functioning, rather than of actual functions; in part it is be-
cause the list protects spaces for people to pursue other functions that
they value.)
The list provides the underpinnings of basic political principles that
can be embodied in constitutional guarantees. For this purpose, it iso-
lates those human capabilities that can be convincingly argued to be of
central importance in any human life, whatever else the person pursues
or chooses. The central capabilities are not just instrumental to further
pursuits: they are held to have value in themselves, in making the life
that includes them fully human. But they are held to have a particularly

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
75
pervasive and central role in everything else people plan and do. In that
sense, too, they play a role analogous to that of primary goods in
Rawls’s recent (political-liberal) theory: they have a special importance
in making any choice of a way of life possible, and so they have a
special claim to be supported for political purposes in a pluralistic so-
ciety.
73
A list of the central capabilities is not a complete theory of justice.
Such a list gives us the basis for determining a decent social minimum
in a variety of areas.
74 I argue that the structure of social and political
institutions should be chosen, at least in part, with a view to promoting
at least a threshold level of these human capabilities. But the provision
of a threshold level of capability, exigent though that goal is, may not
sufﬁce for justice, as I shall elaborate further later, discussing the rela-
tionship between the social minimum and our interest in equality. The
determination of such additional requirements of justiceawaitsanother
inquiry. Moreover, in order to describe how a threshold level of capa-
bility might best be secured, much more needs to be said about the
appropriate role of the public sphere vis-a`-vis incentives to private ac-
tors, and also about how far the public sphere is entitled to control the
activities of private actors in the pursuit of the capabilities on the list.
We could agree that the space of capabilities is the relevant space in
which to make such comparisons, and that a basic social minimum in
the area of the central capabilities should be secured to all citizens,
while disagreeing about the role to be played by governmentandpublic
planning in their promotion. Since a general answer to this question
requires us to answer economic questions that are not in the province
of my inquiry, I shall not give a general answer here,althoughChapters
3 and 4 will discuss the proper role of law in some particular areas of
capability promotion. Many other questions treated by theories of jus-
tice are also left undecided by this account of capability.
75
73 As section VII will show, I also envisage a role for international agencies and interna-
tional human rights law in implementing these capabilities; but on grounds of account-
ability, the nation state remains the basic unit.
74 To perform this function in a useful way the list must have a more clearly demarcated
account of the threshold level than it does in its present form; I discuss that issue later
in this section, and in Chapters 3 and 4.
75 Among these topics are the role of private and public property; the idea of justice
between generations; the role of civil disobedience; and – with the exception of some
brief remarks in section VII – redistributive justice between nations.

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
76
The list represents the result of years of cross-cultural discussion,
and comparisons between earlier and later versions will show that the
input of other voices has shaped its content in many ways. Thus it
already represents what it proposes: a type ofoverlapping consensus
76
on the part of people with otherwise very different views of human life.
In Chapter 2 I shall argue that this fact about how the list has evolved
helps to justify it in an ancillary way, although the primary weight of
justiﬁcation remains with the intuitive conception of truly human func-
tioning and what that entails. By ‘‘overlapping consensus’’ I meanwhat
John Rawls means: that people may sign on to this conception as the
freestanding moral core of a political conception, without accepting
any particular metaphysical view of the world, any particular compre-
hensive ethical or religious view, or even any particular view of the
person or of human nature. Indeed, it is to be expected that holders of
different views in those areas will even interpret the moral core of the
political conception to some extent differently, in keeping with their
different starting points.
77 Thus, a Muslim may say, ‘‘Women are equal
as citizens in the political conception because men and women share a
single metaphysical essential nature.’’ Some Jews
78 and Christianscould
say, by contrast, ‘‘Women are equal as citizens despite the fact that
they have a different essential nature from that of men.’’ A Catholic
Thomist may interpret ‘‘practical reason’’ by thinking about St. Tho-
mas’s Aristotelian conception of choice. Others will think of choice in
a more informal manner, based on their daily experience of planning
and deciding. A Finn may interpret play and recreation in terms of a
comprehensive conception of life in which solitary contemplationinthe
forest plays a large role; a resident of Calcutta is likely to have a differ-
ent set of comprehensive associations in mind. As I interpret Aristotle,
he understood the core of his account of human functioning to be a
freestanding moral conception, not one that is deduced from natural
teleology or any non-moral source.
79 Whether ornotIamcorrectabout
Aristotle, however, my own neo-Aristotelian proposal is intended in
76 See Rawls, PL, 133–72.
77 See Rawls, PL, 144–5.
78 Not all, however: see my ‘‘Judaism and the Love of Reason,’’ in Marya Bower and
Ruth Groenhout, eds., Among Sophia’s Daughters: Philosophy, Feminism, and the
Demands of Faith, forthcoming.
79 See HN.

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
77
that spirit – and also (clearly unlike Aristotle’s) as a partial, not a
comprehensive, conception of the good life,amoralconceptionselected
for political purposes only.
Since the intuitive conception of human functioning and capability
demands continued reﬂection and testing against our intuitions, we
should view any given version of the list as a proposal put forward in
a Socratic fashion, to be tested against the most secure of our intuitions
as we attempt to arrive at a type of reﬂective equilibrium for political
purposes. (I shall discuss this issue of political justiﬁcation further in
section VII.)
Some items on the list may seem to us more ﬁxed than others. For
example, it would be astonishing if the right to bodily integrity were to
be removed from the list; that seems to be a ﬁxed point in our consid-
ered judgments of goodness.
80 On the other hand, one might debate
what role is played by literacy in human functioning, and what role is
played by our relationship to other species and the world of nature. In
this sense, the list remains open-ended and humble; it can always be
contested and remade. Nor does it deny that the items on the list are to
some extent differently constructed by different societies. Indeed, part
of the idea of the list is itsmultiple realizability: its members can be
more concretely speciﬁed in accordance with local beliefs and circum-
stances. It is thus designed to leave room for a reasonable pluralism in
speciﬁcation. The threshold level of each of the central capabilities will
need more precise determination, as citizens work toward a consensus
for political purposes. This can be envisaged as taking place within
each constitutional tradition, as it evolves through interpretation and
deliberation. (Most fundamental constitutional rights are initially de-
scribed at a high level of generality, but this does not mean that they
are impractical or non-justiciable: the tradition of interpretation and
precedent provides the relevant speciﬁcations.) Finally, in its relatively
concrete remarks about matters such as literacy and basic scientiﬁc
education, the list is intended for the modern world, rather than as
timeless.
81
Here is the current version of the list:82
80 I borrow the phrasing, of course, from Rawls, TJ, substituting ‘‘goodness’’ for ‘‘jus-
tice,’’ in keeping with the fact that we are talking about the analogue of ‘‘primary
goods.’’
81 Some of the items are more timeless than others, clearly. Literacy is a concrete speciﬁ-

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
78
CENTRAL HUMAN FUNCTIONAL CAPABILITIES
1. Life. Being able to live to the end of a human life of normal length; not
dying prematurely, or before one’s life is so reduced as to be not worth
living.
2. Bodily Health. Being able to have good health, including reproductive
health;
83 to be adequately nourished; to have adequate shelter.
3. Bodily Integrity. Being able to move freely from place to place; having
one’s bodily boundaries treated as sovereign, i.e. being able to be secure
against assault, including sexual assault, child sexual abuse, and domes-
tic violence; having opportunities for sexual satisfaction and for choice
in matters of reproduction.
4. Senses, Imagination, and Thought.Being able to use the senses,toimag-
ine, think, and reason – and to do these things in a ‘‘truly human’’ way,
a way informed and cultivated by an adequate education, including,but
cation for the modern world of a more general capability that may have been realized
without literacy in other times and places. All the large general rubrics appear rather
timeless, though I do not claim, or need to claim, that human life exhibits an unchang-
ing essence throughout history.
82 The current version of the list reﬂects changes made as a result of my discussions with
people in India. The primary changes are a greater emphasis on bodily integrity and
control over one’s environment (including property rights and employment opportuni-
ties), and a new emphasis on dignity and non-humiliation. Oddly, these features of
human ‘‘self-sufﬁciency’’ and the dignity of the person are the ones most often criticized
by Western feminists as ‘‘male’’ and ‘‘Western,’’ one reason for their more muted role
in earlier versions of the list. See my ‘‘The Feminist Critique of Liberalism.’’
83 The 1994 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) adopted a
deﬁnition of reproductive health that ﬁts well with the intuitive idea of truly human
functioning that guides this list: ‘‘Reproductive health is a state of complete physical,
mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or inﬁrmity, in all
matters relating to the reproductive system and its processes. Reproductive health
therefore implies that people are able to have a satisfying and safe sex life and that
they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when, and how
often to do so.’’ The deﬁnition goes on say that it also implies information and access
to family planning methods of their choice. A brief summary of the ICPD’s recommen-
dations, adopted by the Panel on Reproductive Health of the Committee on Population
established by the National Research Council, speciﬁes three requirements of reproduc-
tive health: ‘‘1. Every sex act should be free of coercion and infection. 2. Every preg-
nancy should be intended. 3. Every birth should be healthy.’’ See Amy O. Tsui, Judith
N. Wasserheit, and John G. Haaga, eds., Reproductive Health in Developing Countries
(Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1997), 13–14.

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
79
by no means limited to, literacy and basic mathematical and scientiﬁc
training. Being able to use imagination and thought in connection with
experiencing and producing self-expressive works and events of one’s
own choice, religious, literary, musical, and so forth. Being able to use
one’s mind in ways protected by guarantees of freedom of expression
with respect to both political and artistic speech, and freedom of reli-
gious exercise. Being able to search for the ultimate meaning of life in
one’s own way. Being able to have pleasurable experiences,andtoavoid
non-necessary pain.
5. Emotions. Being able to have attachments to things and people outside
ourselves; to love those who love and care for us, to grieve at their
absence; in general, to love, to grieve, to experience longing, gratitude,
and justiﬁed anger. Not having one’s emotional development blighted
by overwhelming fear and anxiety, or by traumatic events of abuse or
neglect. (Supporting this capability means supporting forms of human
association that can be shown to be crucial in their development.)
6. Practical Reason. Being able to form a conception of the good and to
engage in critical reﬂection about the planning of one’s life. (Thisentails
protection for the liberty of conscience.)
7. Afﬁliation. A. Being able to live with and toward others, to recognize
and show concern for other human beings, to engage in various forms
of social interaction; to be able to imagine the situation of another and
to have compassion for that situation; to have the capability for both
justice and friendship. (Protecting this capability means protectinginsti-
tutions that constitute and nourish such forms of afﬁliation, and also
protecting the freedom of assembly and political speech.)
B. Having the social bases of self-respect and non-humiliation; being
able to be treated as a digniﬁed being whose worth is equal to that of
others. This entails, at a minimum, protections against discrimination
on the basis of race, sex, sexual orientation, religion, caste, ethnicity,or
national origin.
84 In work, being able to work as a human being, exer-
84 This provision is based on the Indian Constitution, Article 15, which adds (as I would)
that this should not be taken to prevent government from enacting measures to correct
the history of discrimination against women and against the scheduled tribes and
castes. Nondiscrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is not guaranteed by the
Indian Constitution, and in earlier versions of the list I did not include it, judging that
there was so little consensus on this item, especially in India, that its inclusion might
seem premature – although at the same time I stressed the fact that I believe it to be

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
80
cising practical reason and entering into meaningfulrelationshipsofmu-
tual recognition with other workers.
8. Other Species. Being able to live with concern for and in relation to
animals, plants, and the world of nature.85
9. Play. Being able to laugh, to play, to enjoy recreational activities.
10. Control over One’s Environment. A. Political. Being able to participate
effectively in political choices that govern one’s life; having the right of
political participation, protections of free speech and association.
B. Material.Being able to hold property(bothlandandmovablegoods),
not just formally but in terms of real opportunity; and having property
rights on an equal basis with others; having the right to seek employ-
ment on an equal basis with others; having the freedom from unwar-
ranted search and seizure.
86
implied by a right to nondiscrimination on the basis of sex, since I view sexual-
orientation discrimination as a means of shoring up binary divisions between the sexes
that are implicated in sex discrimination. See the Introduction and Chapter 7 in my
Sex and Social Justice. This year, however, the controversy over the disruption of the
feminist ﬁlm Fire has led to much more discussion of sexual orientation in the Indian
media, and to a public recognition by feminists and other liberal thinkers of the impor-
tant links between these issues and women’s full equality. I therefore think it no longer
premature to add this item to a cross-cultural list that is expected to command an
overlapping consensus. I shall discuss this issue further in Chapter 4.
85 In terms of cross-cultural development, this has been the most controversial item on
the list: see Chapter 2 for further discussion. Government can do quite a lot about this
capability, through its choices of policy regarding endangered species, the health and
life of animals, and the ecology. Norway, for example, places tremendous emphasis on
this capability. In Oslo one may build only within ﬁve miles of the coast; past that
‘‘forest line,’’ the inland mountainous region is kept free of habitation to preserve
spaces for people to enjoy solitude in the forest, a central aspect of this capability, as
Norwegians specify it.
86 ASD argued that property rights are distinct from, for example, speech rights, in the
sense that property is a tool of human functioning and not an end in itself. The current
version of the list still insists that more property is not ipso facto better, but it expands
the role of property rights, seeing the intimate relationship between property rights and
self-deﬁnition: see Chapter 2 for further discussion. Most obviously, property rights
should not be allocated on a sex-discriminatory basis, as they currently are under some
of the systems of personal law in India. But it is also important to think of their
absolute value, as supports for other valuable forms of human functioning. Thus all
citizens should have some property, real or movable, in their own names. The amount
requisite will properly be deliberated by each state in the light of its economic situation.
Land is frequently a particularly valuable source of self-deﬁnition, bargaining power,
and economic sustenance, so one might use the list to justify land reforms that appro-
priate surplus land from the rich in order to give the poor something to call their own.
For example, the reform in West Bengal took wealthy landowners’ second homes for
this purpose. See also CHR.

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
81
The list is, emphatically, a list ofseparate components. We cannot
satisfy the need for one of them by giving a larger amount of another
one. All are of central importance and all are distinct in quality. The
irreducible plurality of the list limits the trade-offs that it will be rea-
sonable to make, and thus limits the applicability of quantitative cost-
beneﬁt analysis. One may, of course, always use cost-beneﬁt analysis;
but if one does so in connection with this approach, it will be crucial
to represent in the weightings the fact that each and every one of a
plurality of distinct goods is of central importance, and thus there is a
tragic aspect to any choice in which citizens are pushed below the
threshold in one of the central areas. That tragic aspect could be rep-
resented as simply a huge cost; but it is hard to represent clearly in this
way the fact that adistinctive good is being slighted. One should not
suppose, for example, that the absence of the political liberties would
be made up for by tremendous economic growth, although the use of a
single measure might easily make one think in this way.
87
At the same time, the items on the list are related to one another in
many complex ways. One of the most effective ways of promoting
women’s control over their environment, and their effective right of
political participation, is to promote women’s literacy. Women who
can seek employment outside the home have exit options that help
them protect their bodily integrity from assaults withinit.Reproductive
health is related in many complex ways to practical reason and bodily
integrity. This gives us still more reason to avoid promoting one at the
expense of the others.
Some of the items on the list are, or include, what John Rawls has
called ‘‘natural goods,’’ goods in whose acquisition luck plays a sub-
stantial role. Thus, governments cannot hope to make all citizens
healthy, or emotionally balanced, since some of the determinants of
those positive states are natural or luck-governed. In these areas, what
government can aim to deliver is thesocial basis of these capabilities.
The capabilities approach insists that this requires doing a great deal to
make up for differences in starting point that are caused by natural
endowment or by power, but it is still the social basis of the good, not
87 Thus phrases such as ‘‘Singapore success story’’ might have been harder to use had the
measure of quality of life in terms of GNP per capita not been dominant in develop-
ment policy.

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
82
the good itself, that society can reliably provide. Take women’s emo-
tional health. Government cannot make all women emotionally
healthy; but it can do quite a lot to inﬂuence emotional health,through
suitable policies in areas such as family law, rape law, and public
safety. Something similar will be true of all the natural goods. But
factors we cannot control may still interfere to keep some people from
full capability. When we use capabilities as a comparative measure of
quality of life, we must therefore still inquire about the reasons for the
differences we observe. Some differences in health among nations or
groups are due to factors public policy can control, and others are not.
Basic political principles have done their job if they have provided peo-
ple with the full social basis of these capabilities. (See section V for
further discussion of this point.)
Among the capabilities, two,practical reason and afﬁliation, stand
out as of special importance, since they both organize and suffuse all
the others, making their pursuit truly human. To use one’s senses in a
way not infused by the characteristically human use of thought and
planning is to use them in an incompletely human manner.
88 To plan
for one’s own life without being able to do so in complex forms of
discourse, concern, and reciprocity with other human beings is, again,
to behave in an incompletely human way.
89 To take just one example,
work, to be a truly human mode of functioning, must involve the avail-
ability of both practical reason and afﬁliation. It must involve being
able to behave as a thinking being, not just a cog in a machine; and it
must be capable of being done with and toward others in a way that
involves mutual recognition of humanity.
90 Women’s work lacks this
feature even more often than does men’s work.
When we make practical reason and afﬁliation central in this way,
we are not saying that these are two ends to which all the others can
be reduced. We are not saying, for example, that health is ameremeans
to freedom of choice. But we are saying that a government that makes
available only a reduced and animal-like mode of an important item
such as healthy living, or sensing, has not done enough. All the items
on the list should be available in a form that involves reason and afﬁl-
88 See HN, ASD.
89 See HN on the role of this idea in myths of transformation to and from the human.
90 On Marx’s view, see Brudney, cited earlier.

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
83
iation. This sets constraints on where we set the threshold, for each of
the separate capabilities, and also constraints on which speciﬁcations
of it we will accept.
The basic intuition from which the capability approach begins, in
the political arena, is that certain human abilities exert a moral claim
that they should be developed. Once again, this must be understood as
a freestanding moral idea , not one that relies on a particular meta-
physical or teleological view. Not all actual human abilities exert a
moral claim, only the ones that have been evaluated as valuable from
an ethical viewpoint. (The capacity for cruelty, for example, does not
ﬁgure on the list.) Thus the argument begins from ethical premises and
derives ethical conclusions from these alone, not from any further
metaphysical premises.
91 Nonetheless, it seems to me that we can get a
consensus of the requisite sort, for political purposes, about the core of
our moral argument concerning the moral claim of certainhumanpow-
ers. Human beings are creatures such that, provided with the right
educational and material support, they can become fully capable of all
these human functions. That is, they are creatures with certain lower-
level capabilities (which I call ‘‘basic capabilities’’)
92 to perform the
functions in question. When these capabilities are deprived of the nour-
ishment that would transform them into the higher-level capabilities
that ﬁgure on the list, they are fruitless, cut off, in some way but a
shadow of themselves. When a turtle is given a life thataffordsamerely
animal level of functioning, we have no indignation, no sense of waste
and tragedy. When a human being is given a life that blights powers of
human action and expression, that does give us a sense of waste and
tragedy – the tragedy expressed, for example, in Mrinal’s statement to
her husband, in Tagore’s story, when she says, ‘‘I am not one to die
easily.’’ In her view, a life without dignity and choice, a life in which
she can be no more than an appendage of someone else, is a type of
death, the death of her humanity. ‘‘I have just started living,’’ she ends
her letter – and signs it, ‘‘This is from Mrinal – who is torn off the
shelter of your feet.’’ This sense of tragedy crosses cultural boundaries;
it does not depend upon any particular metaphysical view of human
nature.
91 See HN, with my argument that this is also Aristotle’s view.
92 See NFC, with reference to Aristotle’s ways of characterizing levels of dunamis.

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
84
We begin, then, with a sense of the worth and dignity of basic hu-
man powers, thinking of them as claims to a chance for functioning,
claims that give rise to correlated social and political duties. And infact
there are three different types of capabilities that play a role in the
analysis.
93 First, there are basic capabilities : the innate equipment of
individuals that is the necessary basis for developingthemoreadvanced
capabilities, and a ground of moral concern. These capabilities are
sometimes more or less ready to function: the capability for seeing and
hearing is usually like this. More often, however, they are very rudi-
mentary, and cannot be directly converted into functioning.Anewborn
child has, in this sense, the capability for speech and language, the
capability for love and gratitude, the capability for practicalreason,the
capacity for work.
Second, there areinternal capabilities: that is, developed statesofthe
person herself that are, so far as the person herself is concerned, sufﬁ-
cient conditions for the exercise of the requisite functions. Unlike the
basic capabilities, these states are mature conditions of readiness.
Sometimes readiness simply takes time and bodily maturity: one be-
comes capable of sexual functioning by simply growing, without much
external intervention, although one does need to be adequately nour-
ished. Almost all human children learn to speak their native language:
all they need is to hear it spoken enough during a critical period. More
often, however, internal capabilities develop only with support from
the surrounding environment, as when one learns to play with others,
to love, to exercise political choice. But at a certain point they arethere,
and the person can use them. A woman who has not suffered genital
mutilation has theinternal capability for sexual pleasure; most adult
human beings everywhere have theinternal capability forreligiousfree-
dom and the freedom of speech.
But even when people have developed a power (usually with much
support from the material and social world), they may be prevented
from functioning in accordance with it. Finally, therefore, there are
combined capabilities,
94 which may be deﬁned as internal capabilities
93 See NFC, referring to Aristotle’s similar distinctions; and, on the basic capabilities, HC.
Sen does not use these three levels explicitly, though in practice many of his statements
assume related distinctions.
94 Earlier papers called these ‘‘external capabilities’’ (see NFC), but David Crocker per-

IN DEFENSE OF UNIVERSAL VALUES
85
combined with suitable external conditions for the exercise of the func-
tion. A woman who is not mutilated but who has been widowed as a
child and is forbidden to make another marriage has the internal but
not the combined capability for sexual expression (and, in most such
cases, for employment, and political participation).
95 Citizensofrepres-
sive nondemocratic regimes have the internal but not the combined
capability to exercise thought and speech in accordance with their con-
sciences.
96 The list, then, is a list ofcombined capabilities. To realize
one of the items on the list for citizens of a nation entails not only
promoting appropriate development of their internal powers, but also
preparing the environment so that it is favorable for the exercise of
practical reason and the other major functions.
The distinction between internal and combined capabilities is not a
sharp one, because developing an internal capability usually requires
favorable external conditions; indeed, it very often requires practicing
the actual function. Nonetheless, the distinction does real work, be-
cause even a highly trained capability can be thwarted. We see the
distinction most sharply when there is an abrupt change in the material
and social environment: a person accustomed to exercising religious
freedom and freedom of speech is no longer able to do so. Here we feel
convinced that the internal capability is fully present, but the combined
capability is not. Where there is lifelong deprivation, the distinction is
not so easy to draw: persistent deprivation affects the internalreadiness
to function. A child raised in an environment without freedom of
speech or religion does not develop the same political and religious
capabilities as a child who is raised in a nation that protects these
liberties. (Chapter 2 will discuss this issue at length.) Even in such a
case, however, we can observe many instances in which the distinction
is salient. Many women who, driven by material need, are eager to
work outside the home, and who have skills that they could use to do
suaded me that this misleadingly suggested a focus on external conditions rather than
on internal ﬁtness. In reality I mean to suggest the appropriate combination of both
‘‘internal’’ and ‘‘external.’’
95 See Martha A. Chen, The Lives of Widows in Rural India, forthcoming; and ‘‘A Matter
of Survival: Women’s Right to Employment in India and Bangladesh,’’ in WCD, 37–
57.
96 If repression is sufﬁciently severe and long-lasting, they may also to some degree lack
the internal capability for such expression; see the following discussion.

WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
86
some work, are prevented from working by familial or religious pres-
sures. By insisting that the capabilities on the list are combinedcapabil-
ities, I insist on the twofold importance of material and social circum-
stances, both in training internal capabilitiesand inlettingthemexpress
themselves once trained; and I establish that the liberties and opportu-
nities recognized by the list are not to be understood in a purely formal
manner. They thus correspond to Rawls’s ideas of ‘‘the equal worth of
liberty’’ and ‘‘truly fair equality of opportunity,’’ rather than to the
thinner notions of ‘‘formally equal liberty’’ and ‘‘formal equality of
opportunity.’’
97
A focus on capabilities as social goals is closely related to afocus on
human equality, in the sense that discrimination on the basis of race,
religion, sex, national origin, caste, or ethnicity is taken to be itself a
failure of associational capability, a type of indignity or humiliation.
And making capabilities the goals entails promoting for all citizens a
greater measure of material equality than exists in most societies, since
we are unlikely to get all citizens above a minimum threshhold of ca-
pability for truly human functioning without some redistributive poli-
cies. On the other hand, it is possible for supporters of the general
capability goal to differ about the degree of material equality a society
focused on capability should seek. Complete egalitarianism,
98 a Rawl-
sian difference principle, and a weaker focus on a (rather ample) social
minimum all would be compatible with the proposal as so far ad-
vanced. Where women are concerned, almost all world societies are
very far from even providing the basic minimum of truly human func-
tioning, where many or even most women are concerned; I therefore
leave the debate about levels of equality for a later stage, when the
differences become meaningful in practice.
V. FUNCTIONING AND CAPABILITY
I have spoken both of functioning and of capability. How are they
related? Becoming clear about this is crucial to deﬁning the relation of
97 See Rawls, TJ, 204–5, 72–75.
98 Notice, however, that capability equality would not necessarily entail equality of re-
sources: that all depends on how resources affect capabilities once we get well above
the threshold. Aristotle thought that we reach a point of negative returns: after a
certain ‘‘limit,’’ wealth becomes counterproductive, a distraction from the things that
matter.