How to Do 
Nothing
Resisting 
the Attention 
Economy
Jenny Odell
i MELVILLE HOUSE
BROOKLYN • LONDON


THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF RETREAT 59
exclusive. Removal and contemplation were necessary to be able 
to see what was happening, but that same contemplation would 
always bring one back around to their responsibility to and in the 
world. For Merton, there was no question of whether or not to par­
ticipate, only how:
If I had no choice about the age in which I was to live, I never­
theless have a choice about the attitude I take and about the 
way and the extent of my participation in its living ongoing 
events. To choose the world is ... an acceptance of a task and 
a vocation in the world, in history and in time. In my time, 
which is the present.*®
This question—of how versus whether—has to do with the at­
tention economy insofar as it olfers a useful attitude toward de­
spair, the very stuff the attention economy runs on. It also helps 
me distinguish what it is I really feel like running away from. I’ve 
already written that the "doing nothing” I propose is more than 
a weekend retreat. But that doesn’t mean I propose a permanent 
retreat either. Understanding the impossibility of a once-and-for- 
all exit—for most of us, anyway—sets the stage for a different kind 
of retreat, or refusal-in-place, that I will elaborate on in the next 
chapter.
Here’s what I want to escape. To me, one of the most troubling 
ways social media has been used in recent years is to foment waves 
of hysteria and fear, both by news media and by users themselves. 
Whipped into a permanent state of frenzy, people create and sub­
ject themselves to news cycles, complaining of anxiety at the same 
time that they check back ever more diligently. The logic of adver­
tising and clicks dictates the media experience, which is exploit­
ative by design. Media companies trying to keep up with each other 
create a kind of “arms race” of urgency that abuses our attention 
and leaves us no time to think. The result is something like the 
sleep-deprivation tactics the military uses on detainees, but on a


60 HOW TO DO NOTHING
larger scale. The years 2017 and 2018 were when I heard so many 
people say, “It’s just something new every day.”
But the storm is co-created. After the election, I also saw many 
acquaintances jumping into the melee, pouring out long, emo­
tional, and hastily written diatribes online that inevitably got a lot 
of attention. I’m no exception; my most-liked Facebook post of all 
time was an anti-Trump screed. In my opinion, this kind of hyper- 
accelerated expression on social media is not exactly helpful (not to 
mention the huge amount of value it produces for Facebook). It’s 
not a form of communication driven by reflection and reason, but 
rather a reaction driven by fear and anger. Obviously these feelings 
are warranted, but their expression on social media so often feels 
like firecrackers setting off other firecrackers in a very small room 
that soon gets filled with smoke. Our aimless and desperate expres­
sions on these platforms don’t do much for us, but they are hugely 
lucrative for advertisers and social media companies, since what 
drives the machine is not the content of information but the rate 
of engagement. Meanwhile, media companies continue churning 
out deliberately incendiary takes, and we’re so quickly outraged by 
their headlines that we can’t even consider the option of not read­
ing and sharing them.
In such a context, the need to periodically step away is more 
obvious than ever. Like the managerial employees who wandered 
away from their jobs, we absolutely require distance and time to be 
able to see the mechanisms we thoughtlessly submit to. More than 
that, as I’ve argued thus far, we need distance and time to be func­
tional enough to do or think anything meaningful at all. William 
Deresiewicz warns of this in "Solitude and Leadership,” a speech to 
an audience of college students in 2010. By spending too much time 
on social media and chained to the news cycle, he says, "[y]ou are 
marinating yourself in the conventional wisdom. In other people’s 
reality: for others, not for yourself You are creating a cacophony in 
which it is impossible to hear your own voice, whether it’s yourself 
you’re thinking about or anything else.”^‘


114 HOW TO DO NOTHING
IF ATTENTION AND Will GTC SO closcly linked, then we have even 
more reason to worry about an entire economy and information 
ecosystem preying on our attention. In a post about ad blockers on 
the University of Oxford’s "Practical Ethics” blog, the technology 
ethicist James Williams (of Time Well Spent) lays out the stakes;
We experience the externalities of the attention economy in 
little drips, so we tend to describe them with words of mild 
bemusement like “annoying” or "distracting.” But this is a 
grave misreading of their nature. In the short term, distrac­
tions can keep us from doing the things we want to do. In 
the longer term, however, they can accumulate and keep us 
from living the lives we want to live, or, even worse, under­
mine our capacities for reflection and self-regulation, making 
it harder, in the words of Harry Frankfurt, to “want what we 
want to want.” Thus there are deep ethical implications lurk­
ing here for freedom, wellbeing, and even the integrity of the 
self.“
I first learned about James Williams from a recent Stanford 
master’s thesis by Devangi Vivrekar, called “Persuasive Design 
Techniques in the Attention Economy: User Awareness, Theory, 
and Ethics." The thesis is mainly about how Vivrekar and her col­
leagues in the Human-Computer Interaction department designed 
and experimented with a system called Nudget. In an effort to 
make the user aware of persuasive design, Nudget used overlays to 
call out and describe several of the persuasive design elements in 
the Facebook interface as the user encountered them.^^
But the thesis is also useful simply as a catalog of the many forms 
of persuasive design—the kinds that behavioral scientists have 
been studying in advertising since the mid-twentieth century. For


EXERCISES IN ATTENTION 115
example, Vivrekar lists the strategies identified by researchers Mar- 
well and Schmitt in 1967: ‘‘reward, punishment, positive expertise, 
negative expertise, liking/ingratiation, gifting/pre-giving, debt, 
aversive stimulation, moral appeal, positive self-feeling, negative 
self-feeling, positive altercasting, negative altercasting, positive es­
teem of others, and negative esteem of others.” Vivrekar herself 
has study participants identify instances of persuasive design on the 
Linkedin site and compiles a staggering list of 171 persuasive design 
techniques.^'* A few for example;
Screen# # Persuasive Vehicle Method of Persuasion
1A 1 Notification badges on 
the horizontal toolbar for 
“notifications," “messages,” 
and “network”
Makes you want to click 
and see new notifications 
(arouses curiosity)
1A 2 Red color of notification 
badges on the horizontal 
toolbar
Stands out / catches your 
attention / indicates urgency 
in order to redirect your 
clicks to other people's or 
companies' pages
1A 3 Number on the notification 
badges on the horizontal 
toolbar ^
Makes it feel like a to-do list 
and makes you want to get 
the number to 0 (arouses our 
“base desire for having order 
instead of chaos”)
1A 4 Intermittent variable 
notifications
The delivery schedule of 
notifications is varied and 
intermittent, which keeps it 
changing and thus interesting
1A 5 Textual ad at the top: “Ready 
for a change...”
Tries to get you to click on 
that page by appearing 
organic and relevant
This detailed vocabulary of persuasion and eagle-eyed attentive­
ness to its many forms aligns with my interest in ‘‘knowing your 
enemy” when it comes to the attention economy. For example, one


116 HOW TO DO NOTHING
could draw parallels between the Nudget system, which teaches us­
ers to see the ways in which they are being persuaded, and the Prej­
udice Lab, which shows participants how bias guides their behavior.
But as for the results of this accounting, Vivrekar and I come 
to very different conclusions. Indeed, I found a helpful articula­
tion of my own argument for discipline in a section of hers titled 
"Counter-Arguments.” She writes, "Proponents of the ‘agency’ 
side in the agency vs. structure debate claim that instead of focus­
ing on the problem of how to make persuasion more ethical, we 
should focus on empowering people to have more self control” 
(that’s me!). Vivrekar and the technology ethicists she cites, how­
ever, are less than optimistic about this approach:
Portraying the problem as one in which we just need to be 
more mindful of our interaction with apps can be likened to 
saying we need to be more mindful of our behavior while 
interacting with the artificial intelligence algorithms that 
beat us at chess; equally sophisticated algorithms beat us at 
the attention game all the time.^5
For Vivrekar, persuasion is a given, and the only thing we can do 
about it is redirect it:
When we remember that hundreds of engineers and design­
ers predict and plan for our every move on these platforms, 
it seems more justified to shift the focus of the discussion to­
wards ethical persuasion.
This argument takes a few important things for granted. “Ethi­
cal persuasion” means persuading the user to do something that is 
good for them, using "harmonious designs that continuously em­
power us instead of distracting and frustrating us.” Reading this, I 
can’t help but ask: Empower me to do what? Good for me according 
to whom? And according to what standards? Happiness, productiv­


184 HOW TO DO NOTHING
any apps from my phone, or anything like that. I stopped looking 
at my phone because I was looking at something else, something 
so absorbing that I couldn’t turn away. That’s the other thing that 
happens when you fall in love. Friends complain that you’re not 
present or that you have your head in the clouds; companies deal­
ing in the attention economy might say the same thing about me, 
with my head lost in the trees, the birds, even the weeds growing 
in the sidewalk.
If I had to give you an image of how I feel about the atten­
tion economy now, as opposed to in 2017, I’d ask you to imagine 
a tech conference. Like so many conferences, it would be in an­
other city, perhaps another state. The subject of this conference 
would be persuasive design, with talks by the likes of the Time 
Well Spent people, about how horrible the attention economy is 
and how we can design our way around it and optimize our lives 
for something better. Initially I’d find these talks very interesting, 
and I would learn a lot about how I’m being manipulated by Face- 
book and Twitter. I would be shocked and angry. I would spend 
all day thinking about it.
But then, maybe on the second or third day, you would see me 
get up and go outside to get some fresh air. Then I’d wander a little 
bit farther, to the nearest park. Then—and I know this because it 
happens to me often—I’d hear a bird and go looking for it. If I found 
it, I would want to know what it was, and in order to look that up 
later I’d need to know not only what it looks like, but what it was 
doing, how it sounded, what it looked like when it flew ... I’d have 
to look at the tree it was in.
I’d look at all the trees, at all the plants, trying to notice patterns. 
I would look at who was in the park and who wasn’t. I would want 
to be able to explain these patterns. I would wonder who first lived 
in what is now this city, and who lived here afterward before they 
got pushed out too. I would ask what this park almost got turned 
into and who stopped that from happening, who I have to thank. 
I would try to get a sense of the shape of the land—^where am I in


RESTORING THE GROUNDS FOR THOUGHT 185
relation to the hills and the bodies of water? Really, these are all 
forms of the same question. They are ways of asking; Where and 
when am I, and how do I know that?
Before long, the conference would be over, and I would have 
missed most of it. A lot of things would have happened there that 
are important and useful. For my part, I wouldn’t have much to 
show for my “time well spent”—no pithy lines to tweet, no new 
connections, no new followers. I might only tell one or two other 
people about my observations and the things I learned. Otherwise, 
I’d simply store them away, like seeds that might grow some other 
day if I’m lucky.
Seen from the point of view of forward-pressing, productive 
time, this behavior would appear delinquent. I’d look like a drop­
out. But from the point of view of the place. I’d look like someone 
who was finally paying it attention. And from the point of view of 
myself, the person actually experiencing my life, and to whom 1 
will ultimately answer when I die—I would know that I spent that 
day on Earth. In moments like this, even the question itself of the 
attention economy fades away. If you asked me to answer it, I might 
say—without lifting my eyes from the things growing and creep­
ing along the ground—“I would prefer not to.”
