I
LUCK
THE MIND REELS AT THE THOUGHT OF THE INFINITESIMAL
chances that any one of us had of being born, able to relish even
the slightest glimmer of happiness. In my own case, I can pinpoint
one of the myriad moments when all such chances would have
been eliminated for good. It occurred four years before I was born.
Were it not for my young mother’s newfangled ideas about happi-
ness, I would never have seen the light of day.
My mother, Alva Myrdal, had come close to death after a trau-
matic miscarriage, then developed a large uterine tumor. Her
doctors had urged her to undergo a hysterectomy to remove the
tumor, warning her of the high risks to her life from any future
pregnancy. But she had refused point blank to have an operation
that would have rendered her sterile. Having studied with the
psychologist Alfred Adler, she was convinced that there could be
little happiness for parents of lone, often self-centered children in
what she called “miniature families.”
1 She longed to have siblings
for the one child she and my father, Gunnar Myrdal, had at the
time – my brother Jan, three years old.
Five decades later, I came across a letter in which my father wrote
of his support for her decision to refuse the hysterectomy and
instead opt for a more difficult operation to remove only the tumor.
“We are putting the outcome in the hand of fate. We have always
had magical luck up to now with all that we have undertaken, and I
don’t understand why that should not be the case again.”
As I read that letter, I could see my life, still to come, hanging
by a thread, while my mother-to-be, shy and uncertain though she
Bok, Sissela. Exploring Happiness : From Aristotle to Brain Science, Yale University Press, 2011. ProQuest Ebook
         Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/harvard-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3420979.
Created from harvard-ebooks on 2023-02-06 14:12:32.
Copyright © 2011. Yale University Press. All rights reserved.

must have felt when confronted with the doctors’ expert opinion,
insisted on having her own way. Only thanks to the joint decision
that my father describes and the luck he and she hoped would
continue to be theirs did I come into this astounding world at all.
For that opportunity I continue to be awed and humbly grateful.
Many describe the same feeling after coming face to face with
death, perhaps on learning that they are in remission from cancer
or that they have survived a tornado or an airplane crash.
When I look at my life and those of all others as resulting thus
from innumerable accidents I see these lives as strange and unpre-
dictable adventures. It makes no sense, from such a perspective, to
settle into the rut of blaming parents, society, or fate for the course
one’s life has taken; or to feel locked into some particular mold
that nothing can help one crack open. Yes, we are buffeted by
forces and random events far beyond our control. But this is
no reason to stop generating efforts of our own, to alter the situa-
tion in which we find ourselves, as my mother did. We become
who we are in part by how we respond to the shifting circum-
stances against which our lives delineate themselves.
Happiness, in such a perspective, is to be sought out, pursued,
striven for, as in the myths and folk tales about young persons
setting out to seek their fortune. They have no assurance of
success, no assurance that happiness is owed to them. They have to
traverse unknown regions, encounter seductive lures, take high-
stakes risks, sometimes come back empty-handed. They must find
the right balance between empathy and resilience – between
fellow-feeling and self-protection – as they learn to perceive the
humanity and the urgent needs of many a strange-looking creature,
while remaining wary of all who claim to know the one and only
path to happiness.
The same is true for anyone embarking, as I do in this book,
not so much on a quest to find happiness, still less to prescribe
steps for others to take to achieve it, as to explore what we can learn
about its nature and its role in human lives. Not since antiquity
have there been such passionate debates as those taking
place today about contending visions of what makes for human
2 EXPLORING HAPPINESS
Bok, Sissela. Exploring Happiness : From Aristotle to Brain Science, Yale University Press, 2011. ProQuest Ebook
         Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/harvard-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3420979.
Created from harvard-ebooks on 2023-02-06 14:12:32.
Copyright © 2011. Yale University Press. All rights reserved.

happiness. The sixth and fifth centuries BC saw an unparalleled
display of such visions by poets, prophets, and thinkers such
as Confucius, Buddha, Zoroaster, Lao-Tse, and Socrates, often
challenging ordinary perceptions as illusory and describing other,
distinctive, paths to true happiness. By the first centuries 
AD, claims
about how to achieve salvation, happiness, and bliss resonated in
Eastern cults and mystery religions. They competed not only with
Christianity, Judaism, and the worship of Greek and Roman deities
but also with secular teachings such as those of Aristotle or
Epicurus about earthly happiness as the highest human good.
Now as then, vast populations are on the move, with travelers
bringing unfamiliar creeds from distant regions and with migrants,
driven by wars and privations, encountering novel visions of the
good life. Now as then, the various ideals of happiness carry funda-
mental moral teachings about how to live. And just as the seekers
in myths and folk tales need more than a little luck in order not to
return empty-handed, so does anyone examining the role of happi-
ness today. Just as those seekers benefit from combining sympa-
thetic understanding with a dose of healthy skepticism, so too does
anyone who ventures into the jungle of claims and counterclaims
about happiness – especially when they meet up with conflicting
appeals by religious, political, and other authorities to set aside all
misgivings and place faith in their dictates.
In setting out to explore the subject of happiness, my aim was
twofold. First, I wanted to ask what we can learn about it from
bringing together the striking new findings of natural and social
scientists with long-standing traditions of reflection by philo-
sophers, religious thinkers, historians, poets, and so many others.
Recent decades have witnessed a remarkable growth of scientific
studies shedding light on what people say about their experiences
of happiness and well-being, on fluctuations in the brain during
such experiences, and on the interaction between heredity and the
environment. How might we best draw on the new research –
linking the past and the present, spanning the various disciplines?
Taken together, these different approaches can contribute to a
fuller, deeper understanding of the scope of happiness, even as
LUCK 3
Bok, Sissela. Exploring Happiness : From Aristotle to Brain Science, Yale University Press, 2011. ProQuest Ebook
         Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/harvard-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3420979.
Created from harvard-ebooks on 2023-02-06 14:12:32.
Copyright © 2011. Yale University Press. All rights reserved.