Handbook of Epictetus
1. Some things are up to us and some are not up to us. Our opin­
ions are up to us, and our impulses, desires, aversions—in short, 
whatever is our own doing. Our bodies are not up to us, nor are 
our possessions, our reputations, or our public offices, or, that is, 
whatever is not our own doing. The things that are up to us are 
by nature free, unhindered, and unimpeded; the things that are not 
up to us are weak, enslaved, hindered, not our own. So remember, 
if you think that things naturally enslaved are free or that things 
not your own are your own, you will be thwarted, miserable, and 
upset, and will blcune both gods and men. But if you think that only 
what is yours is yours, and that what is not your own is, just as it 
is, not your own, then no one will ever coerce you, no one will hinder 
you, you will blame no one, you will not accuse anyone, you will 
not do a single thing unwillingly, you will have no enemies, and 
no one will harm you, because you will not be harmed at all.
As you aim for such great goals, remember that you must not 
underttike them by acting moderately,* but must let some things go 
completely and postpone others for the time being. But if you want 
both those great goals and also to hold public office and to be rich, 
then you may perhaps not get even the latter just because you aim 
at the former too; and you certainly will fail to get the former, which 
are the only things that yield freedom and happiness.^
1. This may mean simply that the proposed undertaking is difficult (Oldfather’s 
translation suggests this), or it may mean (as I believe) that the aim cannot be 
achieved by the Aristotelian policy of pursuing a mean or middle course between 
extremes.
2. Epictetus recommends aiming to have one’s state of mind in accord with 
nature, in the sense explained in the previous paragraph and in c. 8 (cf. Introd.). 
His point here is that if you aim for that and also simultaneously for certain “exter­
nals” like wealth, you will probably have neither and clearly will not have the former.
11


12 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
From the start, then, work on saying to each harsh appearance,* 
“You are an appearance, and not at all the thing that has the ap­
pearance.” Then examine it and assess it by these yardsticks that 
you have, and first and foremost by whether it concerns the things 
that are up to us or the things that are not up to us. And if it is 
about one of the things that is not up to us, be ready to say, “You 
are nothing in relation to me.”
2. Remember, what a desire proposes is that you gain what you 
desire, and what an aversion proposes is that you not fall into what 
you are averse to. Someone who fails to get what he desires is unfor­
tunate, while someone who falls into what he is averse to has met 
mirfortune. So if you are averse only to what is against nature among 
the things that are up to you, then you will never fall into anything 
that you are averse to; but if you are averse to illness or death or 
poverty, you will meet misfortune. So detach your aversion from 
everything not up to us, and transfer it to what is against nature 
among the things that are up to us. And for the time being eliminate 
desire completely, since if you desire something that is not up to 
us, you are bound to be unfortunate, and at the same time none 
of the things that are up to us, which it would be good to desire, 
will be available to you. Make use only of impulse and its contrary, 
rejection,* though with reservation, lighdy, and without straining.
3. In the case of everything attractive or useful or that you are fond 
of, remember to say Just what sort of thing it is, beginning with the 
least little things. If you are fond of a jug, say “I am fond of ajug!” 
For then when it is broken you will not be upset. If you kiss your 
child or your wife, say that you are kissing a human being; for when 
it dies you will not be upset.
4. When you are about to undertake some action, remind yourself 
what sort of action it is. If you are going out for a bath, put before
3 , The word appearance translates phantasia^ which some translators render 
by impression or “presentation”. An appearance is roughly the immediate ex­
perience of sense or feeling, which may or may not represent an external state of 
affairs. (The Stoics held, against the Sceptics, that some appearances self-evidently 
do represent external states of affairs correctly.)
4. Impulse and rejection (hormi and aphorm^ are, in Stoic terms, natural and 
non-rational psychological movements, so to speak, that are respectively toward 
or away from external objects.


Handbook of Epictetus / 13
your mind what happens at baths—there are people who splash, people 
who jostle, people who are insulting, people who steal. And you will 
undertake the action more securely if from the start you say of it, 
‘ ‘ I want to take a bath and to keep my choices in accord with nature; ’ ’ 
and likewise for each action. For that way if something happens to 
interfere with your bathing you will be ready to say, “Oh, well, I 
wanted not only this but also to keep my choices in accord with nature, 
and I cannot do that if I am annoyed with things that happen.”
5. What upsets people is not things themselves but their judgments 
about the things. For example, death is nothing dreadful (or else 
it would have appeared dreadful to Socrates), but instead the judg­
ment about death that it is dreadful—that is what is dreadful. So 
when we are thwarted or upset or distressed, let us never blame 
someone else but rather ourselves, that is, our own judgments. 
An uneducated person accuses others when he is doing badly; a partly 
educated person accuses himself, an educated person accuses neither 
someone else nor himself.
6. Do not be joyful about any superiority that is not your own. 
If the horse were to say joyfully, “I am beautiful,” one could put 
up with it. But certainly you, when you say joyfully, “I have a 
beautiful horse, ’ ’ are joyful about the good of the horse. What, then, 
is your own? Your way of dealing with appearances. So whenever 
you are in accord with nature in your way of dealing with appearances, 
then be joyful, since then you tne joyful about a good of your own.
7. On a voyage when your boat has tmchored, if you want to get 
fresh water you may pick up a small shellfish and a vegetable by 
the way, but you must keep your mind fixed on the boat and look 
around frequently in case the captain calls. If he calls you must let 
all those other things go so that you will not be tied up and thrown 
on the ship like livestock. That is how it is in life too: if you are 
given a wife and a child instead of a vegetable and a small shellfish, 
that will not hinder you; but if the captain calls, let all those things 
go and run to the boat without turning back; and if you are old, 
do not even go very far from the boat, so that when the call comes 
you are not left behind.
8. Do not seek to have events happen as you want them to, but 
instead want them to happen as they do happen, and your life will 
go well.


14 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
9. Illness interferes with the body, not with one’s faculty of choice,® 
unless that faculty of choice wishes it to. Lameness interferes with 
the limb, not with one’s faculty of choice. Say this at each thing that 
happens to you, since you will find that it interferes with something 
else, not with you.
10. At each thing that happens to you, remember to turn to yourself 
and ask what capacity you have for de2iling with it. If you see a 
beautiful boy or woman, you will find the capacity of self-control 
for that. If haurdship comes to you, you will find endurance. If it 
is abuse, you will find patience. And if you become used to this, 
you will not be carried away by appearances.
11. Never say about anything, “I have lost it,” but instead, ‘‘I 
have given it back.” Did your child die? It was given back. Did 
your wife die? She was given back. ‘‘My land was taken.” So this 
too was given back. ‘‘But the person who took it was bad!” How 
does the way the giver® asked for it back concern you? As long as 
he gives it, take care of it as something that is not your own, just 
as travelers treat 2m inn.
12. If you want to make progress,^ give up all considerations like 
these: ‘‘If I neglect my property I will have nothing to live on,” 
‘‘If I do not punish my slave boy he will be bad.” It is better to 
die of hunger with distress emd fear gone than to live upset in the 
midst of plenty. It is better for the slave boy to be bad than for you 
to be in a bad state. Begin therefore with little things. A little oil 
is spilled, a little wine is stolen: say, ‘ ‘This is the price of tranquilli­
ty; this is the price of not being upset.” Nothing comes for free. 
When you call the slave boy, keep in mind that he is cajjable of not 
paying attention, and even if he does pay attention he is capable 
of not doing any of the things that you want him to. But he is 
not in such a good position that your being upset or not depends 
on him.
5. “Faculty of choice” translates “proairesis”, which designates a rational faculty 
of the soul (cf. n. 4).
6. The “giver” can be taken to be nature, or the natural order of the cosmos, 
or god, which the Stoics identified with each other.
7. “Making progress” (prokoptein) is the Stoic expression for movement in the 
direction of the ideal condition for a human being, embodied by the Stoic “sage” 
(cf. Introd. and c. 15, n.).


Handbook of Epictetus / 15
13. If you want to make progress, let people think you are a mindless 
fool about externals, and do not desire a reputation for knowing about 
them. If people think you amount to something, distrust yourself. 
Certainly it is not easy to be on guard both for one’s choices to be 
in accord with nature and edso for externals, and a person who 
concerns himself with the one will be bound to neglect the other.
14. You are foolish if you want your children and your wife and 
your friends to live forever, since you are wanting things to be up 
to you that are not up to you, and things to be yours that are not 
yours. You are stupid in the same way if you want your slave boy 
to be faultless, since you are wanting badness not to be badness but 
something else. But wanting not to fail to get what you desire—this 
you are capable of. A person’s master is someone who has power 
over what he wants or does not want, either to obtain it or take it 
away. Whoever wants to be free, therefore, let him not want or avoid 
anything that is up to others. Otherwise he will necessarily be a slave.
15. Remember, you must behave as you do at a banquet. Something 
is passed around and comes to you: reach out your hand politely 
and take some. It goes by: do not hold it back. It has not arrived 
yet: do not stretch your desire out toward it, but wait until it comes 
to you. In the same way toward your children, in the same way toward 
your wife, in the same way toward public office, in the same way 
toward wealth, and you will be fit to shtire a banquet with the gods. 
But if when things are set in front of you, you do not take them 
but despise them, then you will not only share a banquet with the 
gods but also be a ruler along with them. For by acting in this way 
Diogenes and Heraclitus® and people like them were deservedly gods 
and were deservedly called gods.
16. When you see someone weeping in grief at the departure of 
his child or the loss of his property, take care not to be carried away 
by the appearance that the externals he is involved in are bad, and 
be ready to say immediately, “What weighs down on this man is 
not what has happened (since it does not weigh down on someone 
else), but his judgment about it. ’’ Do not hesitate, however, to sym-
8. Diogenes the Cynic (the one who with his lantern looked for an honest man) 
and Heraclitus of Ephesus, the presocratic philosopher, were along with Socrates 
and Zeno people whom the Stoics said might possibly have reached the perfect 
condition of being sages, which the Stoics took to be conceptually no different from 
the perfect condition of a god.


16 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
pathize with him verbally, and even to moan with him if the occa­
sion arises; but be careful not to moan inwardly.
17. Remember that you tu'e an actor in a play, which is as the 
playwright wants it to be: short if he wants it short, long if he wants 
it long. If he wants you to play a beggar, play even this part skillful­
ly, or a cripple, or a public official, or a private citizen. What is 
yours is to play the assigned part well. But to choose it belongs to 
someone else.
18. When a raven gives an unfavorable sign by croaking,® do not 
be carried away by the appearance, but inunediately draw a distinc­
tion to yourself and say, “None of these signs is for me, but only 
for my petty body or my petty property or my petty judgments or 
children or wife. For all signs are favorable if I wish, since it is up 
to me to be benefited by whichever of them turns out correct.”
19. You can be invincible if you do not enter any contest in which 
victory is not up to you. See that you are not carried away by the 
appeEU*ance, in thinking that someone is happy when you see him 
honored ahead of you or very powerful or otherwise having a good,, 
reputation. For if the really good things are up to us, neither envy 
nor jetdousy has a place, tmd you yourself will wemt neither to be 
a general or a magistrate or a consul, but to be free. And there is 
one road to this: despising what is not up to us.
20. Remember that what is insulting is not the person who abuses 
you or hits you, but the judgment about them that they are insulting. 
So when someone irritates you be aware that what irritates you is 
your own belief. Most importantly, therefore, try not to be carried 
away by appeartmce, since if you once gain time and delay you will 
control yourself more easily.
21. Let death and exile and everything that is terrible appear before 
your eyes every day, especially death; and you will never have 
tmything contemptible in your thoughts or crave anything excessively.
9. Most people in antiquity believed in fortune-telling of various kinds, involv­
ing bird-calls, the flight of birds, inspection of entrails, stars, and whatnot. Many 
Stoics, notably Chrysippus, believed in such things, not least because they saw 
in them manifestations of the order of the cosmos and the tight and intricate inter­
connections within it, and thus saw them as scientific rather than superstitious.


Handbook of Epictetus / 17
22. If you crave philosophy prepare yourself on the spot to be ridi­
culed, to be jeered at by many people who will say, “Here he is 
again, all of a sudden turned philosopher on us!” and “Where did 
he get that high brow?” But don’t^oa put on a high brow, but hold 
fast to the things that appear best to you, as someone assigned by 
god to this place. And remember that if you hold to these views, 
those who previously ridiculed you will later be impressed with you, 
but if you are defeated by them you will be doubly ridiculed.
23. If it ever happens that you turn outward to want to please another 
person, certainly you have lost your plan oflife. Be content therefore 
in everything to be a philosopher, and if you want to seem to be 
one, make yourself appear so to yourself, tmd you will be capable of it.
24. Do not be weighed down by the consideration, “I shall live 
without any honor, everywhere a nobody!” For if lack of honors 
is something bad, I cannot be in a bad state because of another per­
son any more than I can be in a shameful one. It is not your task*® 
to gain political office, or be invited to a banquet, is it? Not at all. 
How then is that a lack of honor? And how will you be a nobody 
everywhere, if you need to be a somebody only in things that are 
up to you—in which it is open to you to be of the greatest worth? 
‘ ‘But your friends will be without help! ’ ’ What do you mean, ‘ ‘without 
help?” Well, they will be without a litde cash from you, and you 
will not make them Roman citizens. Who told you, then, that these 
things are up to you tmd not the business of someone else? Who 
can give to someone else what he does not have himself? “Get 
money,” someone says, “so that we may have some.” If I can get 
it while keeping self-respect and trustworthiness and high-mindedness, 
show me the way and I will get it. But if you demand that I lose 
the good things that are mine so that you may acquire things that 
are not good, see for yourselves how unfiiir and inconsiderate you 
are. Which do you want more, money or a self-respecting and 
trustworthy friend? Then help me more toward this, and do not expect 
me to do things that will make me lose these qualities. “But my coun­
try, ’ ’ he says, “will be without help, in so far tis it depends on me! ’ ’ 
Again, what sort of “help” is this? So it will not have porticos and 
baths by your efforts. What does that amount to? For it does not
10. The word translated “task” here and below is ergon, which might also be 
translated by “function.”


18 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
have shoes because of the blacksmith or weapons because of the cob­
bler, but it is enough if each person fulfills his own task. And if you 
furnished for it another citizen who was trustworthy and self- 
respecting, would you in no way be helpful to it? “Yes, I would 
be.” Then neither would you yourself be unhelpful to it. “Then 
what place,” he says “will I have in the city?” The one you can 
have by preserving yoior trustworthiness and self-resp>ect. And if while 
wanting to help it you throw away these things, what use will you 
be to it if you turn out shameless and untrustworthy?
25. Has someone been given greater honor di2m you at a banquet 
or in a greeting or by being brought in to give advice? If these things 
are good, you should be glad that he has got them. If they are bad, 
do not be angry that you did not get them. And remember, you 
cannot demand an equal share if you did not do the same things, 
with a view to getting things that are not up to us. For how can 
someone who does not hang around a person’s door have an equ£J 
share with someone who does, or someone who does not escort him 
with someone who does, or someone who does not praise him with 
someone who does? You will be unjust and greedy, then, if you want 
to obtain these things for free when you have not paid the price for 
which they are bought. Well, what is the price of heads of lettuce? 
An obol, say. So if someone who has paid an obol takes the heads 
of lettuce, and you who do not pay do not take them, do not think 
that you are worse off than the one who did. For just as he has the 
lettuce, you have the obol that you did not pay. It is the same way 
in this case. You were not invited to someone’s banquet? You did 
not give the host the price of the metil. He sells it for praise; he sells 
it for attention. Then give him the balance for which it is sold, if 
that is to your advantage. But you are greedy and stupid if you want 
both not to pay and also to take. Have you got nothing, then, in 
place of the meal? Indeed you do have something; you did not praise 
someone you did not wish to praise, and you did not have to put 
up with the people around his door.
26. It is fKDSsible to learn the will of nature from the things in which 
we do not differ from each other. For example, when someone else’s 
little slave boy breaks his cup we are ready to say, “It’s one of those 
things that just happen.” Certainly, then, when your own cup is 
broken you should be just the way you were when the other person’s 
was broken. Transfer the same idea to larger matters. Someone else’s 
child is dead, or his wife. There is no one would not say, “It’s the


Handbook of Epictetus / 19
lot of a human being.” But when one’s own dies, immediately it
is, “Alas! Poor me!” But we should have remembered how we feel 
when we hear of the same thing about others.
27. Just as a target is not set up to be missed, in the same way 
nothing bad by nature happens in the world.'*
28. If someone turned your body over to just any person who hap­
pened to meet you, you would be 2mgry. But are you not ashamed 
that you turn over your own faculty of judgment to whoever hap­
pens along, so that if he abuses you it is upset and confused?
29. For each action, consider what leads up to it and what follows
it, and approach it in the light of that. Otherwise you will come 
to it enthusiastically at first, since you have not borne in mind 
any of what will happen next, but later when difficulties turn up 
you will give up disgracefully. You want to win an Olympic vic­
tory? I do too, by the gods, since that is a fine thing. But consider 
what leads up to it and what follows it, and undertake the action 
in the light of that. You must be disciplined, keep a strict diet, 
stay away from cakes, train according to strict routine at a fixed 
time in heat and in cold, not drink cold water, not drink wine 
when you feel like it, and in general you must have turned yourself 
over to your trainer as to a doctor, and then in the contest “dig 
in,”'^ sometimes dislocate your hand, twist your ankle, swallow 
a lot of S2md, sometimes be whipped, and, after all that, lose. Think 
about that and then undertake training, if you want to. Otherwise 
you will be behaving the way children do, who play wrestlers one 
time, gladiators another time, blow trumpets another time, then 
act a play. In this way you too are now an athlete, now a gladiator, 
then an orator, then a philosopher, yet you are nothing wholehearted­
ly, but like a monkey you mimic each sight that you see, and one 
thing after another is to your taste, since you do not undertake 
a thing after considering it from every side, but only randomly 
and hadf-heartedly.
In the same way when some people watch a philosopher and hear
11. According to the Stoic view, the universe as a whole is perfect (cf. Introd.), 
and everything in it has a place in its overall design, so that nothing can exist or 
occur that is bad in its relation to that overall design.
12. Nobody knows just what this expression means in this context.


20 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
one speaking like Euphrates*® (though after all who can speak like 
him?), they want to be philosophers themselves. Just you consider, 
as a human being, what sort of thing it is; then inspect youir own 
nature and whether you can bear it. You W2uit to do the pentathlon, 
or to wrestle? Look at your arms, your thighs, inspect your loins. 
Different people are naturally suited for different things. Do you 
think that if you do those things you can eat as you now do, drink 
as you now do, have the same likes and dislikes? You must go without 
sleep, put up with hardship, be away from your own people, be looked 
down on by a little slave boy, be laughed at by people who meet 
you, get the worse of it in everything, honor, pubhc office, law course, 
every litde thing. Think about whether you want to exchange these 
things for tranquillity, freedom, calm. If not, do not embrace 
philosophy, and do not like children be a philosopher at one time, 
later a tax-collector, then an orator, then a procurator of the emperor. 
These things do not go together. You must be one person, either 
good or bad. You must either work on your ruling principle,** or 
work on externals, practice the art either of what is inside or of what 
is outside, that is, play the role either of a philosopher or of a non­
philosopher.
30. Appropriate actions*® are in general measured by relationships. 
He is a father: that entails taking care of him, yielding to him in 
everything, putting up with him when he abuses you or strikes you. 
‘ ‘ But he is a bad father. ’ ’ Does nature then determine that you have 
a good father? No, only that you have a father.*® “My brother has 
done me wrong.” Then keep your place in relation to him; do not 
consider his action, but instead consider what you can do to bring
13. Euphrates was a Stoic lecturer noted for his eloquence.
14. The “ruling principle” (or “governing principle”), the hlgemonikm, in the 
rather complicated psychological theory adopted by the Stoics, is that central part 
of the soul that can understand what is good and decide to act on that understand­
ing. Cf. c. 38, n.
15. “Appropriate actions” are kathekonta, which Cicero called officia, and are 
in English translations often called *‘duties,” though the notion is actually somewhat 
different from that of duty. They are the actions that are of a type generally in 
accord with nature, or with a particular sort of person’s place in it.
16. The idea here is, roughly, that there are certain relationships of affinity 
established by the natural order, and that having a father represents one of them, 
but that having a good father is not entailed by it.


Handbook of Epictetus / 21
your own faculty of choice*’ into accord with nature. Another per­
son will not do you harm unless you wish it; you will be harmed 
at just that time at which you ttike yourself to be harmed. In this 
way, then, you will discover the appropriate actions to expect from 
a neighbor, from a citizen, from a general, if you are in the habit 
of looking at relationships.
31. The most important aspect of piety towtird the gods is certain­
ly both to have correct beliefs about them, as beings that arrange 
the universe well and jusdy, and to set yourself to obey them and 
acquiesce in everything that happens and to follow it willingly, as 
something brought to completion by the best Judgment. For in this 
way you will never blsune the gods or accuse them of neglecting you. 
And this piety is impossible unless you detach the good and the bad 
from what is not up to us and attach it exclusively to what is up 
to us, because if you think that any of what is not up to us is good 
or bad, then when you fail to get what you want and fall into what 
you do not want, you will be bound to blame and hate those who 
cause this. For every animal by nature flees and turns away from 
things that are harmful cmd from what causes them, and pursues 
and admires things that are benefici2d and what causes them. There 
is therefore no way for a person who thinks he is being harmed to 
enjoy what he thinks is harming him, just as it is impossible to enjoy 
the harm itself. Hence a son even abuses his father when the father 
does not give him a share of things that he thinks are good; and 
thinking that being a tyrant was a good thing is what made enemies 
of Polyneices and Eteocles.*® This is why the farmer too abuses the 
gods, tmd the sailor, and the merch2uit, and those who have lost their 
wives and children. For wherever someone’s advantage lies, there 
he also shows piety. So whoever takes care to have desires and aver­
sions as one should also in the same instance takes care about being 
pious. And it is always appropriate to make libations and sacrifices 
and give flrstfruits according to the custom of one’s forefathers, in 
a mzmner that is pure and neither slovenly nor careless, nor indeed 
cheaply nor beyond one’s means.
32. When you make use of fortune-telling, remember that you do
17. Cf. c. 9, n. 5.
18. The story of the conflict between the brothers Polyneices and Eteocles is 
best known to modem readers from Sophocles’ tragedy, Antigone.


22 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
not know what will turn out and have gone to the fortune-teller to 
find out, but that if you really are a philosopher you have gone already 
knowing what sort of thing it is. For if it is one of the things that 
is not up to us, it is bound to be neither good nor bad. Therefore 
do not bring desire or aversion to the fortune-teller and do not ap­
proach him trembling but instead realizing that everything that turns 
out is indifferent*® and nothing in relation to you, and that whatever 
sort of thing it may be, you will be able to deal with it well and no 
one will hinder that. So go confidently to the gods as advisers, and 
thereafter when some particular advice has been given to you 
remember who your advisers are and whom you will be disregard­
ing if you disobey. Approach fortune-telling as Socrates thought a 
person should, in cases where the whole consideration htis reference 
to the outcome, and no resource is avciilable from reason or any other 
technique to find out about the matter. So, when it is necessary to 
share a danger with a friend or with your country, do not use fortune­
telling about whether you should share the danger. For if the fortune­
teller says that the omens are unfavorable, clearly death is signified 
or the injury of a part of your body or exile. But reason chooses 
to stand by your friend and to share danger with your country even 
under these conditions. For this reason pay attention to the greater 
fortune-teller, Pythian Apollo, who threw out of the temple the man 
who did not help his brother when he was being murdered.®®
33. Set up right now a certain character and pattern for yourself 
which you will preserve when you are by yourself and when you 
are with people. Be silent for the most part, or say what you have 
to in a few words. Speak rarely, when the occasion requires spe£ik- 
ing, but not about just any topic that comes up, not about gladiators, 
horse-races, athletes, eating or drinking—the things that cdways come 
up; and especially if it is about p>eople, ttdk without blaming or praising 
or comparing. Divert by your own talk, if you can, the talk of those 
with you to something appropriate. If you happen to be stranded 
among strangers, do not talk. Do not laugh a great deal or at a great 
many things or unrestrainedly. Refuse to swear oaths, altogether 
if possible, or otherwise as circumstances allow. Avoid banquets given
19. Things that are “indifferent” in the Stoic view are all things that are exter­
nal and not up to oneself (cf. c. 1, e.g., and Introd.).
20. The idea is that one does not need a fortune-teller to tell one whether one 
should defend one’s country or one’s friends, and that this fact was recognized 
by the oracle of Apollo at Delphi.


Handbook of Epictetus / 23
by those outside philosophy. But if the appropriate occasion arises, 
take great care not to slide into their ways, since certainly if a 
person’s companion is dirty the person who spends time with him, 
even if he happens to be clean, is bound to become dirty too. Take 
what has to do with the body to the point of bare need, such as food, 
drink, clothing, house, household slaves, and cut out everything that 
is for reputation or luxury. As for sex stay pure as far as possible 
before marriage, and if you have it do only what is allowable. But 
do not be angry or censorious toward those who do engage in it, 
and do not always be making an exhibition of the fact that you do 
not.
If someone reports back to you that so-and-so is saying bad things 
about you, do not reply to them but answer, “Obviously he didn’t 
know my other bad characteristics, since otherwise he wouldn’t just 
have mentioned these.’’
For the most part there is no need to go to public shows, but if 
ever the right occasion comes do not show your concern to be for 
anything but yourself; that is to say, wish to have happen only what 
does happen, and for the person to win who actually does win, since 
that way you will not be thwarted. But refrain completely from 
shouting or laughing at anyone or being very much caught up in 
it. After you leave, do not talk very much about what has happened, 
except what contributes to your own improvement, since that would 
show that the spectacle had impressed you.
Do not go indiscriminately or readily to people’s public lectures, 
but when you do be on guard to be dignified and steady and at the 
same time try not to be disagreeable.
When you are about to meet someone, especially someone who 
seems to be distinguished, put to yourself the question, “What would 
Socrates or Zeno have done in these circumstances?’’ and you will 
not be at a loss as to how to deal with the occasion. When you go 
to see someone who is important, put to yourself the thought that 
you will not find him at home, that you will be shut out, that the 
door will be slammed, that he will pay no attention to you. If it is 
appropriate to go even under these conditions, go and put up with 
what happens, and never say to yourself, “It wasn’t worth tdl that!’’ 
For that is the way of a non-philosopher, someone who is misled 
by externals.
In your conversations stay away from making frequent and 
longwinded mention of what you have done and the dangers that 
you have been in, since it is not as pleasant for others to hear about 
what has happened to you as it is for you to remember your own 
dangers.


24 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
Stay away from raising a laugh, since this manner slips easily into 
vulgarity and at the same time is liable to lessen your neighbors’ 
respect for you. It is also risky to fall into foul language. So when 
anything like that occurs, if a good opportunity arises, go so far as 
to criticize the person who has done it, and otherwise by staying 
silent and blushing and frowning you will show that you are displeased 
by what has been said.
34. Whenever you encounter some kind of apparent pleasure, be 
on guard, as in the case of other appearances, not to be carried away 
by it, but let the thing wait for you and allow yourself to delay. Then 
bring before your mind two times, both the time when you enjoy 
the pleasure and the time when after enjoying it you later regret 
it and berate yourself; and set against these the way you will be pleased 
and will praise yourself if you refrain from it. But if the right occa­
sion appears for you to undertake the action, pay attention so that 
you will not be overcome by its attractiveness and pleasantness and 
seductiveness, and set against it how much better it is to be con­
scious of having won this victory against it.
35. When you do something that you determine is to be done, never 
try not to be seen doing it, even if most people are likely to think 
something bad about it. If you are not doing it rightly, avoid the 
act itself; if you are doing it rightly, why do you feEir those who will 
criticize you wrongly?
36. Just as the propositions “It is day’’ and “It is night’’ have 
their full value when disjoined [rc., in “It is day or it is night’’] but 
have negative value when conjoined [fc., in “It is day and it is night’ ’], 
in the same way, granted that taking the larger portion has value 
for one’s body, it has negative value for preserving the fellowship 
of a banquet in the way one should. So when you eat with another, 
remember not merely to see the value for your body of what lies 
in front of you, but also to preserve your respect for your host.
37. If you undertake some role beyond your capacity, you both 
disgrace yourself by ttiking it 2md also thereby neglect the role that 
you were unable to take.
21. Very roughly, the idea is that the value of tin action has to be judged from 
all features of the context. The parallel is that, allegedly, whether a sentence is 
meaningful depends in a way on its context


Handbook of Epictetus / 25
38. Just as in walking about you pay attention so as not to step 
on a nail or twist your foot, pay attention in the same way so as 
not to harm your ruling principle.And if we are on guard about 
this in every action, we shall set about it more securely.
39. The measure of possessions for each person is the body, as the 
foot is of the shoe. So if you hold to this principle you will preserve 
the measure; but if you step beyond it, you will in the end be carried 
as if over a cliff; just as in the case of the shoe, if you go beyond 
the foot, you get a gilded shoe, and then a purple embroidered one. 
For there is no limit to a thing once it is beyond its measure.
40. Women are called ladies by men right after they are fourteen. 
And so when they see that they have nothing else except to go to 
bed with men, they begin to make themselves up 2md place all their 
hopes in that. It is therefore worthwhile to pay attention so that they 
are aware that they are honored for nothing other than appearing 
modest tmd self-respecting.
41. It shows lack of natural talent to spend time on what concerns 
the body, as in exercising a great deal, eating a great deal, drinking 
a great deal, moving one’s bowels or copulating a great deal. In­
stead you must do these things in passing, but turn your whole at­
tention toward your faculty of judgment.
42. When someone acts badly toward you or speaks badly of you, 
remember that he does or says it in the belief that it is appropriate 
for him to do so. Accordingly he cannot follow what appears to you 
but only what appears to him, so that if things appear badly to him, 
he is harmed in as much as he has been deceived. For if someone 
thinks that a true conjunctive proposition^* is false, the conjunction
22. Cf. c. 29, n.l4.
23. Cf. c. 29, n.l4. The claim is in effect that one should be concerned wholly 
with the state of the ruling part of one’s soul, and not with external states of affairs 
or with those aspects of the soul, such as one’s affective feelings or desires, that 
are directly dependent on external states of affairs. One can see here the Stoic view, 
which seems paradoxical to many, that one’s feelings and non-rational desires are 
in a crucial sense external to one’s true self (cf. c. 6 and Introd.).
24. Cf c. 36. A proposition of this sort consists of two component propositions 
conjoined by “and”.


26 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
is not harmed but rather the one who is deceived. Starting from these 
considerations you will be gende with the person who abuses you. 
For you must say on each occasion, “That’s how it seemed to him. ’ ’
43. Everything has two handles, one by which it may be carried 
and the other not. If your brother acts unjusdy towjird you, do not 
take hold of it by this side, that he has acted unjusdy (since this is 
the handle by which it may not be carried), but instead by this side, 
that he is your brother 2md was brought up with you, and you will 
be taking hold of it in the way that it can be carried.
44. These statements are not valid inferences: “I am richer than 
you; therefore I am superior to you”, or “I am more eloquent than 
you; therefore I am superior to you.” But rather these are valid: 
“I am richer than you; therefore my property is superior to yours’ ’, 
or “12un more eloquent than you; therefore my speaking is superior 
to yours. ’ ’ But you are identical neither with your property nor with 
your speciking.
45. Someone takes a bath quickly; do not say that he does it badly 
but that he does it quickly. Someone drinks a great deal of wine; 
do not say that he does it badly but that he does a great deal of it. 
For until you have discerned what his judgment was, how do you 
know whether he did it badly? In this way it will not turn out that 
you receive convincing appearemces of some things but give assent 
to quite different ones.^®
46. Never call yourself a philosopher and do not talk a great deal 
among non-philosophers about philosophical propositions, but do 
what follows from them. For example, at a banquet do not say how 
a person ought to eat, but eat as a person ought to. Remember that 
Socrates had so completely put aside ostentation that people actually 
went to him when they W2mted to be introduced to philosophers, 
and he took them.^® He was that tolerant of being overlooked. And 
if talkabout philosophical propositions arises among non-philosophers,
25. A “convincing appearance” is a kataUptike pharUasia, the sort of appearance 
that according to the Stoics is a self-evidently correct representation of the way 
things actually tire (cf. n. 3). “Assent” is ymkatathesis. Correct assent would of course 
be assent to self-evidendy correct appearances. The line of thought here is, however, 
quite compressed, and the student will find it a difficult exercize to explain it
26. The allusion is perhaps to the events in the early part of Plato’s Protagoras.


Handbook of Epictetus / 27
for the most part be sUent, since there is a great danger of your spew­
ing out what you have not digested. And when someone says to you 
that you know nothing and you are not hurt by it, then you know 
that you £ire mtiking a start at your task. Sheep do not show how 
much they have eaten by bringing the feed to the shepherds, but 
they digest the food inside themselves, tmd outside themselves they 
bear wool and milk. So in your case likewise do not display proposi­
tions to non-philosophers but instead the actions that come from the 
propositions when they are digested.
47. When you have become cidapted to living cheaply as far as your 
body is concerned, do not make a show of it, and if you drink water 
do not say at every opening that you drink water. If you wish to 
train yourself to hardship, do it for yourself and not for those out­
side. Do not throw your arms around statues.®^ Instead, when you 
are terribly thirsty, take cold water into your mouth, and spit it out, 
and do not tell anyone about it.
48. The position and character of a non-philosopher: he never looks 
for benefit or harm to come from himself but from things outside. 
The position and character of a philosopher: he looks for all benefit 
tmd harm to come from himself.
Signs of someone’s making progress: he censures no one; he 
praises no one; he blames no one; he never talks about himself as 
a person who amounts to something or knows something. When he 
is thwarted or prevented in something, he accuses himself. And if 
someone praises him he laughs to himself at the person who has praised 
him; and if someone censures him he does not respond. He goes 
around like an invalid, careful not to move any of his parts that are 
healing before they have become firm. He has kept off all desire from 
himself, and he has transferred all aversion onto what is against nature 
among the things that tire up to us. His impulses toward everything 
are diminished. If he seems foolish or ignorant, he does not care. 
In a single phrase, he is on guard against himself as an enemy lying 
in wait.
49. When someone acts grand because he understands and can
27. According to a story in Diog. Laert. 6.23, Diogenes the Cynic did this nude 
in cold weather, to toughen himself. But the statues were outdoors, and Diogenes 
was a bit of a showK>fif (but cf n. 8).


28 / HANDBOOK of EPICTETUS
expound the works of Chrysippus,^® say to yourself, “If Chrysippus 
had not written unclearly, this man would have nothing to be proud 
of.”
But what do / want? To learn to understand nature and follow 
it. So I try to find out who explains it. And I hear that Chrysippus 
does, and I go to him. But I do not understand the things that he 
has written, so I try to find the person who explains them. Up to 
this point there is nothing grand. But when I do find someone who 
explains them, what remains is to carry out what has been conveyed 
to me. This alone is grand. But if I am impressed by the explaining 
itself, what have I done but ended up a grammarian instead of a 
philosopher—except that I am explaining Chrysippus instead of 
Homer. Instead, when someone says to me, ‘ ‘ Read me some Chrysip­
pus,” I turn red when I cannot exhibit actions that are similar to 
his words and in harmony with them.
50. Abide by whatever task is set before you as if it were a law, 
and as if you would be committing sacrilege if you went against it. 
But pay no attention to whatever anyone says about you, since that 
falls outside what is yours.
51. How long do you put off thinking yourself worthy of the best 
things, and never going against the definitive capacity of reason?^® 
You have received the philosophical propositions that you ought to 
agree to and you have agreed to them. Then what sort of teacher 
are you still waiting for, that you put off improving yourself until 
he comes? You are not a boy any more, but already a full-grown 
man. If you now neglect things and are lazy and are always making 
delay after delay and set one day after another as the day for paying 
attention to yourself, then without realizing it you will meike no pro­
gress but will end up a non-philosopher all through life and death. 
So decide now that you are worthy of living as a full-grown man 
who is making progress, and make everything that seems best be 
a law that you cannot go against. And if you meet with any hardship 
or anything pleasant or reputable or disreputable, then remember 
that the contest is now and the Olympic games are now and you can­
not put things off any more and that your progress is made or 
destroyed by a single day and a single action. Socrates became fully
28. On Chrysippus, see the Introduction.
29. In brief, the capacity of reason here is that of distinguishing different things 
from each other and defining them.


Handbook of Epictetus / 29
perfect in this way, by not paying attention to anything but his reason 
in everything that he met with. You, even if you are not yet Socrates, 
ought to live as someone wanting to be Socrates.
52. The first and most necessary aspect of philosophy is that of 
dealing with philosophical propositions, such as “not to hold to 
falsehood.” The second is that of demonstrations, for example, “Must 
one not hold to falsehood?” The third is that of the confirmation 
and articulation of these, for example, “Why is this a demonstra­
tion? What is demonstration? What is entailment? What is conflict? 
What is truth? What is falsity?” Therefore the third is necessary be­
cause of the second, and the second because of the first; but the 
most necessary, and the one where one must rest, is the first. We, 
however, do it backwards, since we spend time in the third and all 
of our effort goes into it, and we neglect the first completely. There­
fore we hold to falsehood, but we are ready to explain how it is demon­
strated that one must not hold to falsehood.
53. On every occasion you must have these thoughts ready:
Lead me, Zeus, and you too. Destiny,
Wherever I am assigned by you;
I’ll follow and not hesitate.
But even if I do not wish to.
Because I’m bad. I’ll follow anyway.
Whoever has complied well with necessity
Is counted wise by us, and understands divine affairs.
Well, Crito, if it is pleasing to the gods this way, then let it 
happen this way.
Anytus and Meletus can kill me, but they can’t harm me.*®
30. These four bits of poetry have the following origins. The first is by Clean- 
thes, who was head of the Stoic school at Athens between Zeno and Chrysippus. 
The second is a fragment of Euripides (fr. 965 Nauck). The third is Plato, Crito 
43d, and the fourth is Plato, Apology 30c-d (slightly modified as compared with 
our manuscript texts), both purporting to be quotations from Socrates (cf n. 8).
