TEXT 4: Letter to Menoeceus: Diogenes Laertius 10.121-135
121. Epicurus to Menoeceus, greetings:
122. Let no one delay the study of philosophy while young nor weary 
of it when old. For no one is either too young or too old for the health of 
the soul. He who says either that the time for philosophy has not yet 
come or that it has passed is like someone who says that the time for 
happiness has not yet come or that it has passed. Therefore, both young 
and old must philosophize, the latter so that although old he may stay 
young in good things owing to gratitude for what has occurred, the 
former so that although young he too may be like an old man owing to his 
lack of fear of what is to come. Therefore, one must practise the things 
which produce happiness, since if that is present we have everything and 
if it is absent we do everything in order to have it.
123. Do and practise what I constantly told you to do, believing these 
to be the elements of living well. First, believe that god is an indestruct­
ible and blessed animal, in accordance with the general conception of god 
commonly held, and do not ascribe to god anything foreign to his inde­
structibility or repugnant to his blessedness. Believe of him everything 
which is able to preserve his blessedness and indestructibility. For gods 
do exist, since we have clear knowledge of them. But they are not such as 
the many believe them to be. For they do not adhere to their own views 
about the gods. The man who denies the gods of the many is not impi-


The extant letters 29
ous, but rather he who ascribes to the gods the opinions of the many. 
124. For the pronouncements of the many about the gods are not basic 
grasps but false suppositions. Hence come the greatest harm from 
the gods to bad men and the greatest benefits [to the good]. For the 
gods always welcome men who are like themselves, being congenial 
to their own virtues and considering that whatever is not such is uncongenial.
Get used to believing that death is nothing to us. For all good and 
bad consists in sense-experience, and death is the privation of sense- 
- experience. Hence, a correct knowledge of the fact that death is nothing 
to us makes the mortality of life a matter for contentment, not by adding 
a limitless time [to life] but by removing the longing for immortality. 125. 
For there is nothing fearful in life for one who has grasped that there is 
nothing fearful in the absence of life. Thus, he is a fool who says that he 
fears death not because it will be painful when present but because it 
is painful when it is still to come. For that which while present causes no 
distress causes unnecessary pain when merely anticipated. So death, 
the most frightening of bad things, is nothing to us; since when we exist, 
death is not yet present, and when death is present, then we do not exist. 
Therefore, it is relevant neither to the living nor to the dead, since it does 
not affect the former, and the latter do not exist. But the many sometimes 
flee death as the greatest of bad things and sometimes choose it as a 
relief from the bad things in life. 126. But the wise man neither rejects 
life nor fears death. For living does not offend him, nor does he believe 
not living to be something bad. And just as he does not unconditionally 
choose the largest amount of food but the most pleasant food, so he 
savours not the longest time but the most pleasant. He who advises the 
young man to live well and the old man to die well is simple-minded, 
not just because of the pleasing aspects of life but because the same kind 
of practice produces a good life and a good death. Much worse is he who 
says that it is good not to be born, “but when born to pass through the 
gates of Hades as quickly as possible.”'* 127. For if he really believes 
what he says, why doesn’t he leave life.? For it is easy for him to do, if he 
has firmly decided on it. But if he is joking, he is wasting his time among 
men who don’t welcome it. We must remember that what will happen is 
neither unconditionally within our power nor unconditionally outside 
our power, so that we will not unconditionally expect that it will occur nor 
despair of it as unconditionally not going to occur.
One must reckon that of desires some are natural, some groundless; 
and of the natural desires some are necessary and some merely natural; 
and of the necessary, some are necessary for happiness and some for
18. Theognis 425, 427.


30 Text 4.127-Text 4.13S
freeing the body from troubles and some for life itself 128. The unwa­
vering contemplation of these enables one to refer every choice and 
avoidance to the health of the body and the freedom of the soul from 
disturbance, since this is the goal of a blessed life. For we do everything 
for the sake of being neither in pain nor in terror. As soon as we achieve 
this state every storm in the soul is dispelled, since the animal is not in a 
position to go after some need nor to seek something else to complete the 
good of the body and the soul. For we are in need of pleasure only when 
we are in pain because of the absence of pleasure, and when we are not 
in pain, then we no longer need pleasure.
And this is why we say that pleasure is the starting-point and goal of 
living blessedly. 129. For we recognized this as our first innate good, 
and this is our starting point for every choice and avoidance and we come 
to this by judging every good by the criterion of feeling. And it is just 
because this is the first innate good that we do not choose every pleasure; 
but sometimes we pass up many pleasures when we get a larger amount 
of what is uncongenial from them. And we believe many pains to be 
better than pleasures when a greater pleasure follows for a long while 
if we endure the pains. So every pleasure is a good thing, since it has a 
nature congenial [to us], but not every one is to be chosen. Just as every 
pain too is a bad thing, but not every one is such as to be always avoided. 
130. It is, however, appropriate to make all these decisions by comparative 
measurement and an examination of the advantages and disadvantages. 
For at some times we treat the good thing as bad and, conversely, 
the bad thing as good.
And we believe that self-sufficiency is a great good, not in order that 
we might make do with few things under all circumstances, but so that if 
we do not have a lot we can make do with few, being genuinely convinced 
that those who least need extravagance enjoy it most; and that everything 
natural is easy to obtain and whatever is groundless is hard to obtain; and 
that simple flavours provide a pleasure equal to that of an extravagant 
life-style when all pain from want is removed, 131. and barley cakes and 
water provide the highest pleasure when someone in want takes them. 
Therefore, becoming accustomed to simple, not extravagant, ways of life 
makes one completely healthy, makes man unhesitant in the face of life’s 
necessary duties, puts us in a better condition for the times of extrava­
gance which occasionally come along, and makes us fearless in the face 
of chance. So when we say that pleasure is the goal we do not mean the 
pleasures of the profligate or the pleasures of consumption, as some 
believe, either from ignorance and disagreement or from deliberate 
misinterpretation, but rather the lack of pain in the body and disturbance


The extant letters 31
in the soul. 132. For it is not drinking bouts and continuous partying and 
enjoying boys and women, or consuming fish and the other dainties of an 
extravagant table, which produce the pleasant life, but sober calculation 
which searches out the reasons for every choice and avoidance and drives 
out the opinions which are the source of the greatest turmoil for men’s 
souls.
Prudence is the principle of all these things and is the greatest good. 
That is why prudence is a more valuable thing than philosophy. For pru­
dence is the source of all the other virtues, teaching that it is impossible 
to live pleasantly without living prudently, honourably, and justly, and 
impossible to live prudently, honourably, and justly without living pleasantly. 
For the virtues are natural adjuncts of the pleasant life and the 
pleasant life is inseparable from them.
133. For who do you believe is better than a man who has pious opin­
ions about the gods, is always fearless about death, has reasoned out the 
natural goal of life and understands that the limit of good things is easy 
to achieve completely and easy to provide, and that the limit of bad things 
either has a short duration or causes little trouble.^
As to [Fate], introduced by some as the mistress of all, <he is scornful, 
saying rather that some things happen of necessity, > others by chance, 
and others by our own agency, and that he sees that necessity is not 
answerable [to anyone], that chance is unstable, while what occurs by our 
own agency is autonomous, and that it is to this that praise and blame are 
attached. 134. For it would be better to follow the stories told about the 
gods than to be a slave to the fate of the natural philosophers. For the 
former suggests a hope of escaping bad things by honouring the gods, 
but the latter involves an inescapable and merciless necessity. And he 
[the wise man] believes that chance is not a god, as the many think, for 
nothing is done in a disorderly way by god; nor that it is an uncertain 
cause. For he does not think that anything good or bad with respect to 
living blessedly is given by chance to men, although it does provide the 
starting points of great good and bad things. And he thinks it better to 
be unlucky in a rational way than lucky in a senseless way; 135. for it is 
better for a good decision not to turn out right in action than for a bad 
decision to turn out right because of chance.
Practise these and the related precepts day and night, by yourself and 
with a like-minded friend, and you will never be disturbed either when 
awake or in sleep, and you will live as a god among men. For a man who 
lives among immortal goods is in no respect like a mere mortal animal.
