Firefox about:blank
84 of 95 9/2/2024, 1:26 PM

Firefox about:blank
85 of 95 9/2/2024, 1:26 PM

21
Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammásambuddhassa
Homage to Him, the Blessed One, the Perfected One, 
the Supremely Enlightened One!
1
Yamakavagga
The Pairs
1. Manopubbaògamá dhammá manoseþþhá manomayá; 
manasá ce paduþþhena  bhásati vá karoti vá  
tato naí dukkham anveti  cakkaí va vahato padaí. 
1. Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they 
are all mind-wrought. If with an impure mind a person 
speaks or acts, suffering foll ows him like the wheel that 
follows the foot of the ox. 1
2. Manopubbaògamá dhammá  manoseþþhá manomayá; 
manasá ce pasannena  bhásati vá karoti vá  
tato naí sukham anveti  cháyá va anapáyinì.
2. Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they are 
all mind-wrought. If with a pure mind a person speaks or acts, 
happiness follows him like his never-departing shadow. 2
3. “Akkocchi maí, avadhi maí,  ajini maí, ahási me,” 
ye ca taí upanayhanti,  veraí tesaí na sammati.
3. “He abused me, he struck me, he overpowered me, he 
robbed me”—those who harbour such thoughts do not still 
their hatred. 3

22 Yamakavagga
4. “Akkocchi maí, avadhi maí,  ajini maí, ahási me,” 
ye ca taí n’upanayhanti,  veraí tes’úpasammati.
4. “He abused me, he struck me, he overpowered me, he 
robbed me”—those who do not harbour such thoughts still 
their hatred. 4
5. Na hi verena veráni  sammant’ìdha kudácanaí, 
averena ca sammanti:  esa dhammo sanantano.
5. Hatred is never appeased by hatred in this world; by non-
hatred alone is hatred appeased. This is an eternal law. 5
6. Pare ca na vijánanti,  mayam ettha yamámase; 
ye ca tattha vijánanti,  tato sammanti medhagá.
6. There are those who do not realize that one day we all 
must die, but those who realize this settle their quarrels. 6
7. Subhánupassií viharantaí  indriyesu asaívutaí 
bhojanamhi cámattaññuí  kusìtaí hìnavìriyaí,  
taí ve pasahati Máro  váto rukkhaí va dubbalaí. 
7. Just as a storm throws down a weak tree, so does Mára 
overpower one who lives for the pu rsuit of pleasures, who is 
uncontrolled in his senses, immoderate in eating, indolent 
and dissipated.2 7
2. Mára: the Tempter in Buddhism, represented in the scriptures as 
an evil-minded deity who tries to lead people away from the path to 
liberation. The commentaries explain Mára as the lord of evil forces, 
as mental defilements, and as death.

The Pairs 23
8. Asubhánupassií viharantaí  indriyesu susaívutaí 
bhojanamhi ca mattaññuí  saddhaí áraddhavìriyaí,  
taí ve nappasahati Máro  váto selaí va pabbataí.  
8. Just as a storm cannot throw down a rocky mountain, so 
Mára can never overpower one who lives meditating on the 
impurities, who is controlled in his senses, moderate in 
eating, and filled with faith and earnest effort. 3 8
9. Anikkasávo kásávaí  yo vatthaí paridahissati 
apeto damasaccena,  na so kásávam arahati. 
9. Whoever wears the monk’s yellow robe while being 
depraved, devoid of self-control and truthfulness, he surely is 
not worthy of the yellow robe. 9
10. Yo ca vantakasáv’assa  sìlesu susamáhito 
upeto damasaccena,  sa ve kásávam arahati. 
10. But whoever is purged of depravity, well established in 
virtues, and filled with self-control and truthfulness, he 
indeed is worthy of the yellow robe. 10
11. Asáre sáramatino  sáre cásáradassino, 
te sáraí nádhigacchanti  micchásaòkappagocará.  
11. Those who mistake the unessenti al to be essential and the 
essential to be unessential, dwelling in wrong thoughts, never 
arrive at the essential. 11
3. The impurities (asubha): subjects of meditation which focus on the 
inherent repulsiveness of the body, recommended especially as 
powerful antidotes to lust.

24 Yamakavagga
12. Sárañ ca sárato ñatvá  asárañ ca asárato, 
te sáram adhigacchanti  sammásaòkappagocará. 
12. Those who know the essent ial to be essential and the 
unessential to be unessential, dwelling in right thoughts, 
arrive at the essential. 12
13. Yathá agáraí ducchannaí  vuþþhi samativijjhati, 
evaí abhávitaí cittaí  rágo samativijjhati. 
13. Just as the rain breaks thro ugh an ill-thatched house, even 
so passion penetrates an undeveloped mind. 13
14. Yathá agáraí succhannaí  vuþþhi na samativijjhati, 
evaí subhávitaí cittaí  rágo na samativijjhati. 
14. Just as the rain does not break through a well-thatched 
house, even so passion never penetrates a well-developed 
mind. 14
15. Idha socati pecca socati,  pápakárì ubhayattha socati; 
so socati so vihaññati,  disvá kammakiliþþham attano. 
15. The evil-doer grieves here, he grieves hereafter; he grieves 
in both worlds. He laments and is afflicted, recollecting his 
own impure deeds. 15
16. Idha modati pecca modati,  katapuñño ubhayattha modati; 
so modati so pamodati,  disvá kammavisuddhim attano.  
16. The doer of good rejoices here, he rejoices hereafter; he 
rejoices in both worlds. He rejoices and exults, recollecting his 
own pure deeds. 16

The Pairs 25
17. Idha tappati pecca tappati,  pápakárì ubhayattha tappati; 
pápaí me katan ti tappati,  bhiyyo tappati duggatií gato.  
17. The evil-doer suffers here, he suffers hereafter; he suffers in 
both worlds. The thought, “Evil have I done,” torments him, 
and he suffers even more when gone to realms of woe. 17
18. Idha nandati pecca nandati,  katapuñño ubhayattha nandati; 
puññaí me katan ti nandati, bhiyyo nandati suggatií gato.  
18. The doer of good delights here, he delights hereafter; he 
delights in both worlds. The thought, “Good have I done,” 
delights him, and he delights even more when gone to realms 
of bliss. 18
19. Bahum pi ce sahitaí bhásamáno  na takkaro hoti naro pamatto 
gopo va gávo gaóayaí paresaí  na bhágavá sámaññassa hoti.
19. Although he recites many sacred texts, if he does not act 
accordingly, that heedless ma n is like a cowherd who only 
counts the cattle of others—he does not partake of the bless-
ings of a holy life. 19
20. Appam pi ce sahitaí bhásamáno  dhammassa hoti  
anudhammacárì 
rágañ ca dosañ ca paháya mohaí  sammappajáno  
suvimuttacitto 
anupádiyáno idha vá huraí vá,  sa bhágavá sámaññassa hoti. 
20. Although he recites few sacred texts, if he puts the 
Dhamma into practice, forsakin g lust, hatred, and delusion, 
with true wisdom and emancipated mind, clinging to nothing 
in this or any other world—he, indeed, partakes of the bless-
ings of a holy life.  20