BOOK 6a
[6ai] Gaozi said, “Human nature is like the willow tree; rightness is like cups 
and howls. To make humaneness and rightness out of human nature is 
like making cups and howls out of the willow tree.”
Mencius said, “Are you able to make cups and bowls while following 
the nature of the willow tree? You must do violence to the willow tree 
before you can make cups and bowls. If you must do violence to the 
willow tree in order to make cups and bowls, must you also do violence 
to human beings in order to bring forth humaneness and rightness? 
The effect of your words will be to cause everyone in the world to think 
of humaneness and rightness as misfortunes.”
[6az] Gaozi said, “Human nature is like swirling water. Open a passage for it 
in the east, and it will flow east; open a passage for it in the west, and it 
will flow west. Human nature does not distinguish between good and 
not-good any more than water distinguishes between east and west.” 
Mencius said, “It is true that water does not distinguish between 
east and west, but does it fail to distinguish between up and down? The 
goodness of human nature is like the downward course of water. There 
is no human being lacking in the tendency to do good, just as there is 
no water lacking in the tendency to flow downward. Now, by striking 
water and splashing it, you may cause it to go over your head, and by 
damming and channeling it, you can force it to flow uphill. But is this 
the nature of water? It is force that makes this happen. While people 
can be made to do what is not good, what happens to their nature is 
like this.”
[6A3] Gaozi said, “Life is what is called nature.”


MENCIUS 122
Mencius said, “When you say that ‘life is what is called nature,’ is 
this like saying that ‘white is what is called white’?”
“Yes.”
“Is the whiteness of a white feather like the whiteness of snow, and 
the whiteness of snow like the whiteness of white jade?”
“Yes.”
“Then is the nature of a dog like the nature of an ox, and the nature 
of an ox like the nature of a human being?”
[6A4] Gaozi said, “The appetites for food and sex are human nature. Hu­
maneness is internal rather than external; rightness is external rather 
than internal.”
Mencius said, “Why do you say that humaneness is internal while 
rightness is external?”
Gaozi said, “One who is older than I, I treat as an elder. This is 
not because there is in me some sense of respect due to elders. It is 
like something being white and my recognizing it as white; I am re­
sponding to the whiteness, which is external. Therefore I call right­
ness external.”
Mencius said, “There is no difference between the whiteness of a 
white horse and the whiteness of a white man. But is there no differ­
ence between the age of an old horse and the age of an old man? What 
is it that we speak of as rightness—the man’s being old or my regarding 
him with the respect due to one who is old?”
Gaozi said, “Here is my younger brother; I love him. There is the 
younger brother of a man from Qin; him I do not love. The feeling 
derives from me, and therefore I describe it as internal. I treat an el­
der from Chu as old, just as I treat our own elders as old. The feeling 
derives from their age, and therefore I call it external.”
Mencius said, “Our fondness for the roast meat provided by a man 
of Qin is no different from our fondness for the roast meat provided by 
one of our own people. Since this is also the case with a material thing, 
will you say that our fondness for roast meat is external as well?”
[6A5] Meng Jizi asked Gongduzi, “Why do you say that rightness is internal?” 
Gongduzi said, “We are enacting our respect, and therefore it is 
internal.”


123 BOOK 6a
“Suppose there were a villager who was one year older than your 
older brother—^whom would you respect?”
“I would respect my older brother.”
“For whom would you pour wine first when serving at a feast?”
“I would pour it first for the villager.”
“You respect the one, but treat the other as older. So in the end, 
rightness is external and not internal.”
Gongduzi, being unable to reply, told Mencius about it. Mencius 
said, “Ask him, whom does he respect more, his uncle or his younger 
brother? He will say that he respects his uncle. You then ask him, if his 
younger brother were impersonating the deceased at a sacrifice, whom 
would he respect more? He will say that he would respect his younger 
brother. Then ask, where is the respect due to his uncle? He will say that 
it is because of his younget brother’s position that he shows him greater 
respect. Then you may also say that it is because of the position of the 
villager that you show him respect. While ordinarily the respect belongs 
to your brother, on occasion the tespect belongs to the villager.”
Jizi heard this and said, “When respect is due to my uncle, I show 
him respect; when respect is due to my brother, I show the respect to 
him. So respect is after all determined by externals and is not inter­
nally motivated.”
Gongduzi said, “In the winter we drink hot water, while in the sum­
mer we drink cold water. Does this mean that drinking and eating too 
are externally determined?”
[6a6] Gongduzi said, “Gaozi said that human nature is neither good nor 
not-good. Others say that human nature can be made to be good or 
not-good, which is why, during the reigns of Kings Wen and Wu, the 
people were inclined to goodness, whereas under the reigns of You and 
Li, the people were inclined to violence. Still others say that the natures 
of some are good and the natures of others are not good, which is why, 
when Yao was the ruler, there could be Xiang,’ while, with a father like
I. According to this view of human nature, which is obviously not that of Mencius, the 
fact that a violent man like Xiang could have lived during the reign of the sage-king Yao is 
evidence that people differ widely in their natures. Xiang was the depraved brother of Yaos 
exemplary successor, Shun.


MENCIUS 124
Gusou, there could be Shun,^ and with Zhou^ as the son of their older 
brother as well as their ruler, there could be Ql, the Viscount of Wei, 
and Prince Bigan. Now, you say that human nature is good. Does this 
mean that these others are all wrong?”
Mencius said, “One’s natural tendencies enable one to do good; this 
is what I mean by human nature being good. When one does what is 
not good, it is not the fault of one’s native capacities. The mind of pity 
and commiseration is possessed by all human beings; the mind of shame 
and dislike is possessed by all human beings; the mind of respectful­
ness and reverence is possessed by all human beings; and the mind that 
knows right and wrong is possessed by all human beings. The mind of 
pity and commiseration is humaneness; the mind of shame and dislike 
is rightness; the mind of respectfulness and reverence is propriety; and 
the mind that knows right and wrong is wisdom. Humaneness, right­
ness, propriety, and wisdom are not infused into us from without. We 
definitely possess them. It is just that we do not think about it, that is 
all. Therefore it is said, “Seek and you will get it; let go and you will lose 
it.”^ That some differ from others by as much as twice, or five times, or 
an incalculable order of magnitude is because there are those who are 
unable fully to develop their capacities. The ode says.
Heaven, in giving birth to humankind.
Created for each thing its own rule.
The people’s common disposition 
Is to love this admirable Virtue.^
Confucius said, ‘How well the one who made this ode knew the Way!’ 
Therefore, for each thing, there must be a rule, and people’s common 
disposition is therefore to love this admirable Virtue.”
2. Gusou, the Blind Man, was the paradigm of the cruel father, to whom Shun none­
theless remained filial and devoted.
3. Zhou, the last ruler of the Shang dynasty, was universally believed to have been a 
monstrous tyrant. His older brother, Qi, and his uncle, Bigan, attempted, with notable lack 
of success, to counsel him.
4. See also the statement attributed to Confucius at the end of 6a8.
5. Ode 260 (Le^e, Chinese Classics, 4:541-45).


125 book 6a
[6A7] Mencius said, “In years of abundance, most of the young people 
have the wherewithal to be good, while in years of adversity, most of 
them become violent. This is not a matter of a difference in the na­
tive capacities sent down by Heaven but rather of what overwhelms 
their minds.
“Now, let barley be sown and covered with earth; the ground being 
the same, and the time of planting also the same, it grows rapidly, and 
in due course of time,® it all ripens. Though there may be differences in 
the yield, this is because the fertility of the soil, the nourishment of the 
rain and the dew, and the human effort invested are not the same.
“Things of the same kind are thus like one another. Why is it that 
we should doubt this only when it comes to human beings? The sage 
and we are the same in kind. So LongzF said, ‘If someone makes shoes 
without knowing the size of a person’s feet, I know that he will not 
make baskets.’ That shoes are similar is because everyone in the world 
has feet that are alike. And when it comes to taste, all mouths are alike 
in their preferences. Yi Ya was first to apprehend what all mouths pre­
fer. If, with regard to the way mouths are disposed to tastes, human 
nature differed from person to person, as is the case with dogs and 
horses differing from us in kind, why should it be that everyone in 
the world follows Yi Ya in matters of taste? The fact that everyone in 
the world takes Yi Ya as the standard in matters of taste is because we 
all have mouths that are similar. It is likewise with our ears; when it 
comes to sounds, everyone in the world takes Music Master Kuang as 
the standard because the ears of everyone in the world are similar. And 
so likewise with our eyes: when it comes to Zidu,® there is no one in 
the world who fails to recognize his beauty because one who failed to 
recognize the beauty of Zidu would have to be without eyes. Therefore 
I say mouths find savor in the same flavors; ears find satisfaction in the 
same sounds; eyes find pleasure in the same beauty. When it comes to
6. David S. Nivison takes zhi yu ri zhi zhi shi MK' B to mean “by midsum­
mer,” with ri zhi meaning “the summer solstice” (“On Translating Mencius,” in The Ways of 
Confucianism: Investigations in Chinese Philosophy, ed. Bryan W. Van Norden [La Salle, 111.: 
Open Court, 1996], 184).
7. See 3A3.
8. A man famous for his good looks.


MENCIUS 126
our minds, could they alone have nothing in common? And what is it 
that our minds have in common? It is order and rightness.® The sage 
is just the first to apprehend what our minds have in common. Thus 
order and rightness please our minds in the same way that meat pleases 
our mouths.”
[6a8] Mencius said, The trees on Ox Mountain were once beautiful. But 
being situated on the outskirts of a large state, the trees were cut down 
by axes. Could they remain beautiful? Given the air of the day and the 
night, and the moisture of the rain and the dew, they did not fail to 
put forth new buds and shoots, but then cattle and sheep came along 
to graze upon them. This accounts for the barren appearance of the 
mountain. Seeing this barrenness, people suppose that the mountain 
was never wooded. But how could this be the nature of the mountain? 
So it is also with what is preserved in a human being: could it be that 
anyone should lack the mind of humaneness and rightness? If one lets 
go of the innate good mind, this is like taking an ax to a tree; being cut 
down day after day, can [ones mind] remain beautiful? Given the rest 
that one gets in the day and the night, and the effect of the calm morn- 
s likes and dislikes will still resemble those of other people, 
but barely so. And then one can become fettered and destroyed by what 
one does during the day; if this fettering occurs repeatedly, the effect of 
the night qi will no longer be enough to allow one to preserve his mind, 
and he will be at scant remove from the animals. Seeing this, one might 
suppose that he never had the capacity for goodness. But can this be 
a human beings natural tendency? Thus, given nourishment, there is 
nothing that will not grow; lacking nourishment, there is nothing that 
will not be destroyed. Confucius said, ‘Hold on and you preserve it; let
9. Following A. C. Graham, Nivison points to a parallel here with a passage in chap. 4 
of the Lushi chunqiu {The Springs and Autumns of Master Lu), in which the hedonist Zihuazi 
is quoted as saying: “ ‘True kings enjoy the conduct by which they rise to power, the ruined 
likewise enjoy the conduct by which they are ruined.’... If this is so, true kings have a taste 
for order and duty, the ruined likewise have a taste for tyranny and idleness. Their tastes 
are not the same, so their fortunes are not the same” (A. C. Gtaham, “The Background of 
the Mencian (Mengzian) Theory of Human Nature,” cited in Nivison, “On Translating 
Mencius,” 183—84).


127 book 6a
it go and you lose it. The time of its going out and coming in is not 
fixed, and there is no one who knows the place where it goes.’ In saying 
this, he was referring to the mind.”
[6A9] Mencius said, “The king’s lack of wisdom is hardly surprising. Take 
something that is the easiest thing in the world to grow. Expose it to 
the heat for a day, and then expose it to cold for ten days. It will not 
be able to grow. I see the king but seldom, and when I withdraw, the 
agents of cold arrive. Even if I have caused some buds to appear, what 
good does it do?
“Now, chess is one of the minor arts, but without concentrating 
one’s mind and applying one’s will, one cannot succeed in it. Chess 
Qiu is the finest chess player anywhere in the state; suppose that Chess 
Qiu is teaching two people to play chess. One of them concentrates his 
mind and applies his will, listening only to Chess Qiu. The other, while 
listening to him, is actually occupying his whole mind with a swan that 
he believes is approaching. He thinks about bending his bow, fitting his 
arrow, and shooting the swan. While he is learning alongside the other 
man, he does not compare with him. Is this because his intelligence is 
not comparable? I would say that this is not so.”
[6aio] Mencius said, “I desire fish, and I also desire bear’s paws. If I cannot 
have both of them, I will give up fish and take bear’s paws. I desire life, 
and I also desire rightness. If I cannot have both of them, I will give up 
life and take rightness. It is true that I desire life, but there is something 
I desire more than life, and therefore I will not do something dishonor­
able in order to hold on to it. I detest death, but there is something I 
detest more than death, and therefote there are some dangers I may not 
avoid. If, among a person’s desires, there were none greater than life, 
then why should he not do anything necessary in order to cling to life? 
If, among the things he detested, there were none greater than death, 
why should he not do whatever he had to in order to avoid danger? 
There is a means by which one may preserve life, and yet one does not 
employ it; there is a means by which one may avoid danger, and yet one 
does not adopt it.
“Thus there are things that we desire more than life and things that 
we detest more than death. It is not exemplary persons alone who have
