Happiness Gen Ed 1025
Professor Susanna Rinard, Fall 2025

Lecture Outline: Jean-Paul Sartre’s Existentialism Is a Humanism

Four existentialist claims: 

Existence precedes essence.

“Man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world – and defines himself afterwards … to begin with he is nothing.  He will not be anything until later, and then he will be what he makes of himself.....There is no human nature .... man simply is.”

God does not exist.  We are “alone in the universe.”  No objective human purpose, no objective rules of morality, no objective sources of value or guidance in how to live, no objective meaning of life.  In stark contrast to most authors we have read so far.

Freedom – Man is “condemned to be free.”  

Libertarianism about free will, and the rejection of determinism.

Determinism “makes a person into an object” like a table or chair.

No Excuses – Responsibility

"The first effect of existentialism is that it puts every man in possession of himself as he is, and places the entire responsibility for his existence squarely upon his own shoulders."

“From the moment he is thrown into this world, he is responsible for everything that he does.”  

No excuses, because we cannot blame prior predetermined causes of our actions.

Objections to (1) and (3):

Again, Sartre claims: Man is “thrown into the world; surges up in the world.”  Alone.  In possession of himself.  Responsible for everything that he does.

Objection: Let’s get real.  Babies are born utterly helpless and will die unless cared for by others.  Babies are not responsible for what they do.

Robin Wall Kimmerer: By the time a child has developed to the point of responsibility, their very existence is a gift made possible by extensive care from loved ones.  You arrive at this point not alone, but in the presence of loving family and friends who have played a large role in making you who you are.  The proper response is gratitude for this love and care and the desire to reciprocate by giving back. 

Objection to Sartre: Your experiences in childhood and youth strongly shape your personality, dispositions, values, etc.  By the time you can take responsibility for your actions, how then, are you free?  Don’t these influences create an essence that precedes your existence as a responsible agent?  What we do is heavily influenced by prior events over which we had no control.

Actions Alone Create Essence

Your essence – what kind of person you are – is created by your actions, and not by anything else – not by your intentions, your plans, your potential, your abilities, your self-conception, your self-identity, your personality, etc.  Your actions, and nothing else, create your system of values, the purpose of your life, the meaning of your life, etc.

Sartre: Man is not “what he conceives himself to be, but he is what he wills.”  “There is no reality except in action.”  “There is no love apart from the deeds of love; no potentiality of love other than that which is manifested in loving.”

Example: Cowardice.  A coward is someone who performs cowardly actions; a hero is someone who performs heroic actions.  You choose whether to be a coward or a hero when you choose which actions to perform.  It is always within your power to stop being a coward and become a hero, or vice versa.

Example: Mother or War.  Your love for your mother consists in your choice to care for her.  Your commitment to a cause consists in the actions that you perform in service of it.

How, if at all, can the existentialist judge other people?

Not by reference to an external standard of morality.  Only by whether they are self-deceived.

“Since we have defined the situation of man as one of free choice, without excuse and without help, any man who takes refuge behind the excuse of his passions, or by inventing some deterministic doctrine, is a self-deceiver.”  “Those who hide from this total freedom, in a guise of solemnity or with deterministic excuses, I shall call cowards.”

Objection: Is Sartre claiming that humanity does have an essential nature after all, namely, freedom?

In choosing for yourself, do you choose for all of humanity?

The Argument: To choose A over B for yourself is to regard A as superior to B.  If A is superior to B for you, then it must be so for everyone.  Example: monogamy.  Example: freedom.

Objection: What if A and B are equally good, or incommensurable, or value is context-sensitive?

Can we, contra Sartre, affirm self-evident objective moral truths as we do for math and logic?

A Final Thought: Consider the option of embracing your freedom as Sartre suggests, but then choosing to adopt and live by an existing system of value (either religious or secular).  (Perhaps one we’ve looked at in this course, e.g. from Epicurus, Mencius, the Buddha, Kimmerer, etc.)